SEARCH_TOPIC: Prenatal testing
TITLE: The impact of preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy on prenatal screening.
PMID: 34837490
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34837490/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
To determine whether preimplantation genetic testing for aneuploidy (PGT-A) is associated with a reduced risk of abnormal conventional prenatal screening results in singleton pregnancies conceived using <i>in vitro</i> fertilization (IVF). This was a retrospective cohort study of singleton IVF pregnancies conceived from a single tertiary care center between January 2014 and September 2019. Exclusion criteria included mosaic embryo transfers, vanishing twin pregnancies, and cycles with missing outcome data. Two cases of prenatally diagnosed aneuploidy that resulted in early voluntary terminations were also excluded. The primary outcome of abnormal first or second-trimester combined screening results was compared between two groups: pregnancy conceived after transfer of a euploid embryo by PGT-A vs. transfer of an untested embryo. Multivariable backwards-stepwise logistic regression with Firth method was used to adjust for potential confounders. Of the 419 pregnancies included, 208 (49.6%) were conceived after transfer of a euploid embryo by PGT-A, and 211 (50.4%) were conceived after transfer of an untested embryo. PGT-A was not associated with a lower likelihood of abnormal first-trimester (adjusted OR 1.64, 95% CI 0.82-3.39) or second-trimester screening results (adjusted OR 0.96, 95% CI 0.56-1.64). The incidences of cell-free DNA testing, fetal sonographic abnormalities, genetic counseling, and invasive prenatal diagnostic testing were similar between the two groups. Our data suggest that PGT-A is not associated with a change in the likelihood of abnormal prenatal screening results or utilization of invasive prenatal diagnostic testing. Counseling this patient population regarding the importance of prenatal screening and prenatal diagnostic testing, where appropriate, remains essential.