SEARCH_TOPIC: Braces and orthodontics
TITLE: Comparison of fixed braces and clear braces for malocclusion treatment.
PMID: 39143508
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39143508/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
To study and compare the effects of clear aligners without brackets and traditional fixed aligners in orthodontic treatment. The samples were collected from January 2022 to April 2023. The control group (n = 26) received orthodontic treatment using traditional fixed appliances. The research group (n = 20) received orthodontic treatment using the clear aligners without brackets. Compare the therapeutic effects and related evaluation indicators between two groups. The total effective ratio was compared between the 2 groups, and the study group was greater(P < 0.05). After treatment, the detected values of the periodontal condition indicators (plaque index, debris index, and gingival bleeding index), serum inflammatory factors (CRP, IL-6 and TNF-α) of the two groups, were less than before, also were all less than the control group. (P < 0.05). After therapy, in comparison of the control group, the value of mastication efficiency, comfort and psychological evaluation, sleep indicators and the points of the four dimensions of life quality in the study group was greater, and the detection results were obviously greater than before(P < 0.05). In the orthodontic therapy of sufferers with malocclusion, compared with the traditional fixed appliance, the clear aligners without brackets can enhance the treatment effects, improve the periodontal condition and masticatory function, and reduce the inflammatory responses, so that patients can feel more comfortable, thereby improving their psychology, sleep and quality of life. In the future, with the continual advancement of technology and people's pursuit of beauty, the application of clear aligners without brackets in orthodontic treatment will become more and more extensive. The continuous introduction of new materials and new technologies will further improve the effects and comfort of the clear aligners without brackets, reduce treatment time and discomfort, and also reduce patients' resistance to aligners, bringing patients a better treatment experience.