SEARCH_TOPIC: HPV vaccine
TITLE: HPV Vaccine-Related Research, Promotion and Coordination in the State of Georgia: A Systematic Review.
PMID: 30374822
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30374822/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Human papillomavirus (HPV) vaccine was first recommended for female adolescents in the United States in 2006, and for male adolescents in 2011. In 2016, national HPV vaccine coverage was 43.4%, and slightly higher in Georgia (45.6%). Little is known about sub-state-level variation in HPV vaccination or Georgia specific research conducted to improve HPV vaccine uptake. We aimed to describe current uptake of HPV vaccination and synthesize Georgia-specific research of HPV vaccine uptake. We reviewed existing published and grey literature for different development, implementation and best practices related to vaccine uptake in adolescents. Studies measuring HPV vaccine uptake in Georgia utilizing quantitative, qualitative, or mixed-methods approaches were included alongside state-level information from National Immunization Survey-Teen, Community Health Needs Assessments, Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance and Georgia Adolescent Immunization Surveys. Key findings across these reports were summarized. Forty-two titles and abstracts were identified through electronic database search for literature published between 2006 and 2017. Of these, five were from database sources and 37 were from additional sources. The most often mentioned barriers of HPV vaccine uptake in Georgia include cultural norms, vaccination education and a misalignment of vaccine uptake goals between the state and regional hospital community needs assessments. Increasing knowledge and uptake of HPV vaccine in Georgia requires significant research and to understand the vast socioeconomic, cultural and geographic barriers preventing uptake among adolescents. Georgia-specific efforts have been limited, however ongoing collaborations spearheaded by the Georgia Cancer Control Coalition provide opportunities for state-level support of research to address these barriers.