SEARCH_TOPIC: Rheumatoid arthritis
TITLE: Painful rheumatoid arthritis.
PMID: 21927056
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21927056/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Rheumatoid arthritis is a crippling disease that is often associated with severe pain, suffering, and diminished function, thereby detracting from an optimal quality of life. Over the past decade a greater appreciation of the pathophysiology of rheumatoid arthritis has been gained. In the past "decade of pain research," biologic agents which may modify rheumatoid arthritis have emerged as potent therapeutic antirheumatic drugs. Biologic agents include 5 tumor necrosis factor alpha inhibitors (etanercept, infliximab, adalimumab, golimumab, certolizumab pegol), interleukin-1 blockers (anakinra), monocloncal antibodies against B cells (rituximab), T cell costimulation blocker (abatacept), and interleukin-6 inhibitors (tocilizumab). Currently, utilizing therapy aimed at targeting various abnormalities of rheumatoid arthritis may be possible. It appears that the combined use of etanercept and methotrexate may improve the imbalance of Th1/Th2 and Th17/regulatory T cells (Treg) (and related cytokines) often seen in rheumatoid arthritis. Furthermore, this improvement in Tcell ratios/cytokines is also associated with improvement in clinical indicators of rheumatoid arthritis severity. Although rheumatologists are generally the specialists "called on" to manage complex patients with rheumatoid arthritis, pain specialists may be asked to join interdisciplinary teams managing patients with advanced refractory rheumatoid arthritis with severe pain since one of the most common and debilitating symptoms of rheumatoid arthritis is pain. Thus, pain specialists should have some appreciation of the current thoughts regarding rheumatoid arthritis pathophysiology and treatment. This narrative review of rheumatoid arthritis is intended to familiarize the interventional pain specialist with current concepts surrounding rheumatoid arthritis.