SEARCH_TOPIC: Hospital infection control
TITLE: Models for the organisation of hospital infection control and prevention programmes.
PMID: 15760439
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/15760439/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Hospital infection control is an essential part of infectious disease management and must be firmly structured and professionally organised. Prevention, limitation and eradication of nosocomial infections requires specific expertise not fully provided by clinical microbiologists and/or infectious disease consultants. Therefore, dedicated infection control physicians and nurses are essential. The basic components for successful hospital infection control include: (1) personnel and supporting resources proportional to size, complexity and estimated risk of the population served; (2) trained hospital infection control practitioners; and (3) the necessary structure to implement changes in medical, nursing and logistical organisation. The identification of areas of concern, provision of written policies and education still constitute the backbone of infection control. The infection control team must propose priorities and necessary resources, objectives, development methods, implementation and follow-up. The strategic approach must be discussed and approved by the infection control committee, comprising the hospital administrator(s), medical and nursing directors, a microbiologist, a hospital pharmacist and a delegation of clinicians. Follow-up of the projects is regularly presented to the committee by the infection control team. To what extent may evolution in the organisation of hospital infection control contribute to the optimisation of allocated resources and fulfillment of these objectives? From the Belgian experience, we conclude that structural changes represent an essential incentive. The impact of changes is greater when they are directed by the national authorities, providing resources and imposing new standards. Recommendations for staffing must consider not only the number of beds but also the objectives, complexity and characteristics of the patient population.