SEARCH_TOPIC: Public health policy
TITLE: Public health policy for temporary seasonal workers with chronic hepatitis B in high-income countries: A comparative analysis.
PMID: 39504985
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39504985/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
This study examines Australia's Hepatitis B public health policies with a focus on the Pacific Australia Labour Mobility scheme seasonal workers as a priority population. The aim is to evaluate if Australia's Hepatitis B public health policies adequately address health disparities and equitable access to health care for seasonal workers as a priority population. We draw comparisons with the public health policies of New Zealand and Canada, to understand how these nations approach similar health concerns among their temporary seasonal workers. A health policy analysis was conducted on the public health Hepatitis B policies in Australia and then compared with those in Canada and New Zealand. Due to the nature of the study question, the review had a major focus on grey literature. The search was undertaken in two stages, including (1) Google search engine and (2) targeted websites. Basic document data was produced in descriptive summaries. Any data either explicitly or inexplicitly relating to the elimination of hepatitis B or equity towards the inclusion of seasonal workers was produced as analytical summaries through multiple revisions. Nineteen documents were identified, predominantly from Australia. Although Hepatitis B public health policies emphasised testing and awareness in priority populations, specifically mentioning seasonal workers as a priority population was absent in all three countries. The study underscores the exclusion of temporary seasonal workers in public health policies and strategies as a human rights issue, conflicting with principles of equity and equitable access to health care. Despite acknowledging challenges for temporary visa holders, policies lack specific provisions for seasonal workers. Addressing this gap is crucial for health equity and inclusive health systems. SO WHAT?: Our findings highlight the need to prioritise equity for temporary seasonal workers to achieve hepatitis B elimination goals by 2030. Exclusion from public health policies is a human rights concern, impacting access to quality health care. This study advocates for inclusive policies explicitly recognising temporary seasonal workers as a priority population, aligning with international human rights commitments to health care for all.