SEARCH_TOPIC: Massage therapy
TITLE: Can postoperative massage therapy reduce pain and anxiety in cardiac surgery patients?
PMID: 30508186
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30508186/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
A best evidence topic in cardiac surgery was written according to a structured protocol. The question addressed was, 'In patients undergoing cardiac surgery, is postoperative massage therapy effective in reducing pain, anxiety and physiological parameters?' Altogether, 287 papers were found using the reported search, of which 7 papers represented the best evidence to answer the clinical question. The authors, journal, date and country of publication, patient group studied, study type, relevant outcomes and the results of these papers are tabulated. The specific therapy protocols widely varied between studies, with differences in frequency, specific timing in the postoperative period, techniques used and experience of therapy provider. These variations limit the generalization and transferability of the conclusions. The effect of massage therapy on anxiety levels was reported in 5 studies. All but one demonstrated a significant improvement in anxiety. Pain was also reported in 5 studies, with significant improvement demonstrated in 4 studies. Importantly, a number of these studies failed to report on analgesic requirements nor demonstrate a reduction in opioid requirements, thus limiting the validity of the drawn conclusions. There is significant heterogeneity in randomized trials reporting on the effects of massage therapy. Although there is evidence to suggest that massage therapy reduces pain and anxiety following cardiac surgery, there are often caveats to the conclusions drawn with other studies reporting no significant difference. Therefore, in light of this, it would not be logical to recommend massage therapy as an effective therapy. There is no current evidence to suggest that massage therapy improves physiological parameters, including the onset of atrial fibrillation postoperatively.