SEARCH_TOPIC: Integrative health
TITLE: One Digital Health for more FAIRness.
PMID: 36070786
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36070786/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
One Digital Health (ODH) aims to propose a framework that merges One Health's and Digital Health's specific features into an innovative landscape. FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable) principles consider applications and computational agents (or, in other terms, data, metadata, and infrastructures) as stakeholders with the capacity to find, access, interoperate, and reuse data with none or minimal human intervention. This paper aims to elicit how the ODH framework is compliant with FAIR principles and metrics, providing some thinking guide to investigate and define whether adapted metrics need to be figured out for an effective ODH Intervention setup. An integrative analysis of the literature was conducted to extract instances of the need-or of the eventual already existing deployment-of FAIR principles, for each of the three layers (keys, perspectives and dimensions) of the ODH framework. The scope was to assess the extent of scatteredness in pursuing the many facets of FAIRness, descending from the lack of a unifying and balanced framework. A first attempt to interpret the different technological components existing in the different layers of the ODH framework, in the light of the FAIR principles, was conducted. Although the mature and working examples of workflows for data FAIRification processes currently retrievable in the literature provided a robust ground to work on, a nonsuitable capacity to fully assess FAIR aspects for highly interconnected scenarios, which the ODH-based ones are, has emerged. Rooms for improvement are anyway possible to timely deal with all the underlying features of topics like the delivery of health care in a syndemic scenario, the digital transformation of human and animal health data, or the digital nature conservation through digital technology-based intervention. ODH pillars account for the availability (findability, accessibility) of human, animal, and environmental data allowing a unified understanding of complex interactions (interoperability) over time (reusability). A vision of integration between these two worlds, under the vest of ODH Interventions featuring FAIRness characteristics, toward the development of a systemic lookup of health and ecology in a digitalized way, is therefore auspicable.