SEARCH_TOPIC: Exercise for pregnancy
TITLE: Clinical Practice Guidelines That Address Physical Activity and Exercise During Pregnancy: A Systematic Review.
PMID: 34841649
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34841649/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Physical activity is recommended for healthy pregnant women. Clinical practice guidelines vary with regard to initial time, duration, or type of physical activity that is recommended, which is confusing for health care professionals and pregnant women alike. This study aimed to appraise clinical guidelines relevant to physical activity for pregnant women and summarize consensus and discrepant recommendations. The websites of organizations that develop guidelines including those of obstetricians, gynecologists, midwives, and medical sports associations were searched in addition to 9 literature databases for the period from January 2010 through November 2020. Guidelines were included if they were published in a journal or on a website in English or Chinese; were labeled as a recommendation guideline, position paper, practice parameter, or consensus statement; and addressed physical activity for pregnant women. Two authors independently extracted recommendations. Four reviewers independently assessed guideline quality using the AGREE II instrument. Thirteen guidelines met the inclusion criteria. The guidelines developed by the World Health Organization and the National Institute for Health and Clinical Excellence were deemed to have the highest methodological quality. The recommendations were consistent with regard to recommended exercise duration, frequency, intensity, and type of physical activity. The main discrepant recommendations included best tools for conducting pre-exercise screening and assessing intensity of exertion. Guidelines also differ on optimal heart rate during exercise, when in pregnancy to initiate an exercise regimen, and duration or frequency of strengthening exercises. Of the 13 guidelines, 2 were found to have good methodological quality. The recommendations that were consistent across the differing guidelines can support health care providers in counseling women about physical activity during pregnancy. The recommendations that are discrepant among these guidelines may contribute to confusion and a reluctance to recommend exercise during pregnancy. Research is needed to clarify discrepant recommendations.