SEARCH_TOPIC: Superfoods
TITLE: Superfoods in Drug Discovery: Nutrient Profiles and their Emerging Health Benefits.
PMID: 40277052
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/40277052/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Superfoods' nutritional characteristics and health benefits have garnered attention recently. These foods contain vitamins, minerals, flavonoids, and polyphenols, which prevent disease and promote health. This review examines the nutritional and therapeutic properties of amla, maca, jackfruit, Brazil nuts, and goji berries. Recent study highlights their role to mitigate chronic diseases like diabetes, heart disease, dementia, and cancer. This extensive review aims to cover the health and nutritional benefits of su-perfoods. It also discusses the macro- and micronutrients of amla, maca, jackfruit, Brazil nuts, and goji berries. Additionally, we explore the potential of superfoods to protect against chronic diseases, including diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cognitive decline, and cancer. A comprehensive investigation was carried out to find published literature using Web of Science, PubMed, and Scopus. In addition to Boolean operators (AND, OR), keywords such as "superfood," "bioactive compounds", "functional foods", and "health benefits" were integrated. Superfoods, their bioactive ingredients, and potential health benefits based on preclinical or clinical data were the subject of permitted research. Research on isolated or synthesized substances unrelated to superfoods, articles without experimental data, and non-peer-reviewed databases were excluded. Our research reveals that superfoods include health-promoting phytochemicals, carotenoids, flavonoids, and polyphenols. They may prevent diseases like diabetes, cardiovascular disease, cancer, and obesity. In conclusion, superfoods improve health and wellness in numerous ways. Superfoods prevent chronic illnesses and improve health. This review discusses the nutritional content and health advantages of superfoods, which may encourage their consumption. More research is needed to promote global health and wellness using superfoods.