SEARCH_TOPIC: Aerobic exercise
TITLE: Current Perspectives on Aerobic Exercise in People with Parkinson's Disease.
PMID: 32808252
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32808252/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Parkinson's disease (PD) is a progressive neurological disorder characterized by motor and non-motor symptoms for which only symptomatic treatments exist. Exercise is a widely studied complementary treatment option. Aerobic exercise, defined as continuous movement of the body's large muscles in a rhythmic manner for a sustained period that increases caloric requirements and aims at maintaining or improving physical fitness, appears promising. We performed both a scoping review and a systematic review on the generic and disease-specific health benefits of aerobic exercise for people with PD. We support this by a meta-analysis on the effects on physical fitness (VO<sub>2</sub>max), motor symptoms (Movement Disorder Society Unified Parkinson's Disease Rating Scale (MDS-UPDRS) motor section), and health-related quality of life (39-item Parkinson's disease Questionnaire (PDQ-39)). Aerobic exercise has generic health benefits for people with PD, including a reduced incidence of cardiovascular disease, a lower mortality, and an improved bone health. Additionally, there is level 1 evidence that aerobic exercise improves physical fitness (VO<sub>2</sub>max) and attenuates motor symptoms (MDS-UPDRS motor section) in the off-medication state, although the long-term effects (beyond 6 months) remain unclear. Dosing the exercise matters: improvements appear to be greater after training at higher intensities compared with moderate intensities. We found insufficient evidence for a beneficial effect of aerobic exercise on health-related quality of life (PDQ-39) and conflicting results regarding non-motor symptoms. Compliance to exercise regimes is challenging for PD patients but may be improved by adding exergaming elements to the training program. Aerobic exercise seems a safe intervention for people with PD, although care must be taken to avoid falls in at-risk individuals. Further studies are needed to establish the long term of aerobic exercise, including a focus on non-motor symptoms and health-related quality of life.