SEARCH_TOPIC: Whey protein
TITLE: Whey protein hydrolysates and infant formulas: Effects on physicochemical and biological properties.
PMID: 38578124
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38578124/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Whey protein hydrolysates are recognized for their substantial functional and biological properties. Their high digestibility and amino acid composition make them a valuable ingredient to hydrolyzed whey infant formulas, enhancing both product functionality and nutritional values for infant growth. It is important to understand the functional and biological properties of whey protein hydrolysates for their applications in infant formula systems. This review explored preparation methods of whey protein hydrolysates for infant formula-based applications. The effects of whey protein hydrolysate on the physicochemical and biological properties of hydrolyzed whey infant formulas were summarized. The influences of whey protein hydrolysates on the functional and nutritional properties of formulas from manufacturing to infant consumption were discussed. Whey protein hydrolysates are crucial components in the preparation of infant formula, tailored to meet the functional and nutritional demands of the product. The selection of enzyme types and hydrolysis parameters is decisive for obtaining "optimal" whey protein hydrolysates that match the intended characteristics. "Optimal" whey protein hydrolysates offer diverse functionalities, including solubility, emulsification and production stability to hydrolyzed whey infant formulas during manufacturing processes and formulations. They simultaneously promote protein digestibility, infant growth and other potential health benefits, including reduced allergenic potential, as supported by in vitro, in vivo and clinical trials. Overall, the precise selection of enzymes and hydrolysis parameters in the production of whey protein hydrolysates is crucial in achieving the desired characteristics and functional benefits for hydrolyzed whey infant formulas, making them critical in the development of infant nutrition products.