SEARCH_TOPIC: Cognitive rehabilitation
TITLE: Illiteracy, Neuropsychological Assessment, and Cognitive Rehabilitation: A Narrative Review.
PMID: 37581821
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37581821/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Νeuropsychological assessment is particularly important for the accurate discrimination of cognitive abilities and weaknesses of patients in order to determine the appropriate therapeutic intervention. However, the reliability and validity of neuropsychological assessment appears to be influenced by a wide range of factors, including literacy and educational level. This systematic review evaluates neuropsychological tests appropriate for the valid assessment of illiterate individuals and the effectiveness of cognitive rehabilitation programs for illiterate and/or low-educated individuals according to the results of English language studies that have been published in the PubMed/Medline electronic database until August 2022 (no initiation date). 49 studies were included for neuropsychological assessment and 4 studies for cognitive rehabilitation. In terms of investigating the validity and reliability of neuropsychological tests for the assessment of healthy illiterate individuals, most studies concluded that for the majority of neuropsychological tests there is a significant difference in performance between healthy illiterate and literate individuals. However, there was consensus among studies that the performance of illiterate subjects was equivalent to the performance of literate subjects on tasks depicting colored and real objects. Regarding cognitive rehabilitation programs, all four studies concluded that they are effective in improving the cognitive functions of illiterate and/or low-literate patients with mild cognitive impairment and/or mild dementia. For the assessment of illiterate individuals, it is imperative that neuropsychological tests with high ecological validity (i.e., tests related to activities of daily living) be administered so as not to underestimate their cognitive functioning. At the same time, cognitive enhancement/stimulation programs seem to be effective in this population group; however, this area needs further investigation.