SEARCH_TOPIC: Wound healing process
TITLE: Skin Wound Healing: Of Players, Patterns, and Processes.
PMID: 36417847
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36417847/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Wound healing of the skin is a very complex biological activity. For a better understanding, an attempt is made to describe and subdivide the different players (cell types and signaling molecules), patterns (different regeneration or repair mechanisms), and processes (division of the overall process into categories, phases, and steps). However, this is always based on different points of view. On the one hand, the temporality of the phases and on the other hand, the dominant activity in each step can play a role. In addition, classifications according to wound theory and wound treatment are possible. To gain an initial overview of (human) skin wound healing, simple classifications are advantageous for understanding and thus deserve to exist. The complexity of the underlying biology of skin wound healing takes on a multidimensional configuration upon closer examination, in which new actors are constantly being identified, making the events more precise and comprehensible but also significantly confusing when viewed as a whole. From this point of view, the healing process must be categorized so that the observer does not get lost in the multitude of interacting processes. In view of the steadily increasing knowledge, which includes in parallel the physiological as well as the pathophysiological processes of wound healing, the classification according to function in the sense of consecutive and overlapping phases seems the most convenient and considers the corresponding processes more precisely. Despite that many mechanisms and specific cellular functions in wound healing have been identified, many underlying (patho-)physiological processes still remain unknown. Currently, a substantial part of research activities in medicine is limited to molecular levels, while evidence for therapies currently in use is lacking or newly gained knowledge is quite far from clinical applicability and reality. This article aimed to shed more light on the various classifications of skin wound healing and presents the underlying paradigms starting from simple approaches and ending with more detailed concepts.