SEARCH_TOPIC: Burnout syndrome
TITLE: Burnout syndrome in intensive care professionals: relationships with health status and wellbeing.
PMID: 31253584
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31253584/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
To determine the predictive models that include the dimensions of burnout that are predictors for physical/mental health, and subjective/psychological wellbeing perceived in intensive care professionals; to analyse the relationships between burnout syndrome, health status and wellbeing experienced by these professionals; and to establish sociodemographic differences in the variables evaluated. A correlational and cross-sectional study was conducted. A total of 52 critical care professionals, mainly nurses, were recruited from an intensive care unit of Madrid. All participants were assessed with the questionnaires: Maslach Burnout Inventory-Human Services Survey, Short Form-12 Health Survey, Satisfaction With Life Scale, Positive and Negative Affect Schedule, and Psychological Well-Being Scales. No significant sociodemographic differences were found. High levels in the three burnout dimensions were associated with poor physical/mental health and subjective/psychological wellbeing. High scores in emotional exhaustion and depersonalization, and low in personal accomplishment negatively predicted subjective and psychological well-being scales. The self-acceptance scale had the highest predictive validity. Emotional exhaustion was the only burnout dimension that negatively predicted physical and mental health. Health status and levels of subjective/psychological wellbeing can be negatively influenced by the burnout syndrome experienced by intensive care professionals. As a result, the implementation of programmes to prevent and treat this syndrome is needed. These preventive interventions can positively impact not only the health and wellbeing of these professionals, but can also improve their ability to practice effectively, improve healthcare quality and patient security, and reduce the economic costs of health institutions. It is therefore imperative to implement burnout preventive programmes for intensive care professionals from universities to health institutions.