SEARCH_TOPIC: Emotional intelligence
TITLE: Emotional Intelligence in Medicine: An Investigation of the Significance for Physicians, Residents, and Medical Students - A Systematic Review.
PMID: 39471567
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39471567/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Physicians, residents, and medical students consistently report higher levels of stress, anxiety, depression, burnout, and suicide compared to the general population. Emotional intelligence is a trait 1 possesses that has been shown to have associations with aspects of mental health specifically in the medical field. It has also been studied in business literature demonstrating multiple performance benefits. The purpose of this review is to investigate the relationship of emotional intelligence and mental health and well-being, clinical performance, and academic success with physicians, residents, and medical students. A systematic review was conducted of studies investigating the associations of emotional intelligence on physicians, residents, or medical students between 2013 and 2023. Studies investigating the association of empathy within the study population were also included. Studies must have used a validated measure or reported a reliable method of measuring emotional intelligence or empathy. Thirty-nine articles were included. The trait emotional intelligence questionnaire short form was the most frequently used assessment tool (28%). Mental health and well-being was the most common study outcome (67%). Twenty articles reported lower levels of burnout in those with higher emotional intelligence levels. (p < 0.05). Other protective associations of emotional intelligence included decreased levels of anxiety, stress, and depression (p < 0.05). Emotional intelligence was associated with multiple clinical performance metrics including patient satisfaction, perceived communication ratings, patient information recall, and improved decision making under operational stress (p < 0.05). Emotional intelligence has beneficial associations for physicians at all levels of training. Those entering with higher levels of emotional intelligence may be better suited to handle the psychological effects described within the healthcare field. Emotional intelligence can also be improved through training. Using emotional intelligence as part of a holistic screening process may help predict and enhance the success of doctors, residents, and medical students, which can contribute to improving the healthcare system.