SEARCH_TOPIC: Male infertility
TITLE: Lycopene in male infertility.
PMID: 39656221
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39656221/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Male infertility is a major concern around the world, and efforts to find effective therapies to improve reproductive results are continuing. Factors such as genetics, hormonal disorders, lifestyle, and environmental pollutants have been mentioned as the pathoetiology of male infertility. The treatment of male infertility is far from optimal despite the recent signs of progress provided by assisted reproductive technology. Therefore, many efforts are being made to improve the therapeutical approaches to male infertility, which generally target the factors involved in the pathophysiology of the disease. Lycopene is a naturally occurring pigment belonging to the carotenoid family, which imparts a vibrant red color to various fruits and vegetables. It is widely assumed that lycopene may be an optimal option for the improvement of male fertility, however, the verification its therapeutic potential in male infertility has not been comprehensively reviewed. The study discusses the ability of lycopene to improve semen parameters, including sperm morphology, and motility which are important determinants of male reproductive health. Moreover, lycopene's capacity to regulate sex hormones, such as testosterone, luteinizing hormone (LH) and follicle-stimulating hormone (FSH), which play crucial roles in sperm production and maturation is explained. Additionally, lycopene effects on specific signaling pathways involved in male fertility, including prokineticin-2 (PROK2) and PI3K/Akt pathways, that influence sperm function are clarified. Furthermore, the impacts of lycopene as a potent antioxidant in defending against oxidative stress, a leading cause of male infertility, are presented. Overall, the results indicate that lycopene may have beneficial effects on improving male fertility by increasing sperm parameters, modulating sex hormones and signaling pathways, and providing antioxidant protection. Due to limited reports, additional clinical data is required to confirm the positive effects of lycopene on male fertility in humans.