SEARCH_TOPIC: Exercise for pregnancy
TITLE: Effects of moderate-intensity resistance exercise on blood glucose and pregnancy outcome in patients with gestational diabetes mellitus: A randomized controlled trial.
PMID: 35379538
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35379538/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
To investigate the effects of a structured moderate-intensity resistance exercise program on blood glucose levels and other health-related indicators in patients with GDM. A total of 99 patients with GDM in a tertiary class A general hospital were randomly divided into an experimental group and a control group. GDM patients in the control group received routine prenatal care, online education, and a personalized diabetes diet intervention. The experimental group was treated in the same way as the control group with the addition of a moderate intensity resistance exercise program. The blood glucose levels in both groups were lower after the intervention compared with before intervention (P < 0.05). After intervention, the average fasting blood glucose, the 2 h postprandial blood glucose, the utilization rate of insulin, the amount of insulin, gestational weight gain and blood pressure (P < 0.05) in the experimental group were lower than the control group. In addition, there was no statistical significance in the incidence of adverse pregnancy outcomes between the two groups after intervention (P > 0.05). Moderate intensity resistance exercise was helpful for improvement of blood glucose control and insulin use, gestational weight gain and blood pressure in patients with GDM. In the future, long-term follow-up of both maternal and newborn infants should be performed to assess the long-term effects of exercise intervention on maternal and child health. The impact on the risk of obesity and diabetes may need to be further clarified. The trial was approved by the registration of the Chinese Clinical Trial Registry, and registration number: ChiCTR1900027929.