SEARCH_TOPIC: Trauma informed care
TITLE: Trauma Providers' Knowledge, Views, and Practice of Trauma-Informed Care.
PMID: 29521782
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29521782/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Trauma-informed interventions have been implemented in various settings, but trauma-informed care (TIC) has not been widely incorporated into the treatment of adult patients with traumatic injuries. The purpose of this study was to examine health care provider knowledge, attitudes, practices, competence, and perceived barriers to implementation of TIC. This cross-sectional study used an anonymous web-based survey to assess attitudes, knowledge, perceived competence, and practice of TIC among trauma providers from an urban academic medical center with a regional resource trauma center. Providers (nurses, physicians, therapists [physical, occupational, respiratory]) working in trauma resuscitation, trauma critical care, and trauma care units were recruited. Descriptive statistics summarized knowledge, attitudes, practice, competence, and perceived barriers to TIC and logistic regression analyses examined factors predicting the use of TIC in practice. Of 147 participants, the majority were nurses (65%), followed by therapists (18%) and physicians (17%), with a median 3 years of experience; 75% answered the knowledge items correctly and 89% held favorable opinions about TIC. Nineteen percent rated themselves as less than "somewhat competent." All participants rated the following as significant barriers to providing basic TIC: time constraints, need of training, confusing information about TIC, and worry about retraumatizing patients. Self-rated competence was the most consistent predictor of providers' reported use of specific TIC practices. Despite some variability, providers were generally knowledgeable and held favorable views toward incorporating TIC into their practice. TIC training for trauma providers is needed and should aim to build providers' perceived competence in providing TIC.