SEARCH_TOPIC: Emotional intelligence
TITLE: Emotional intelligence in nurse managers as it relates to staff nurse job satisfaction and retention: a scoping review.
PMID: 33720107
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33720107/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The objective of this review was to map what is known about nurse manager emotional intelligence in relation to nurse job satisfaction and retention, and the tools used to measure emotional intelligence in this context. As the health care environment responds to the demands of high-quality and low-cost care, nurse managers must ensure that patient care environments are safe, efficient, and effective. Understanding nurse manager emotional intelligence may help organizations improve nurse satisfaction and retention as a strategy for reducing costs. This review considered experimental and quasi-experimental study designs, analytical observational studies, descriptive observational studies, systematic reviews and meta-analyses, qualitative studies, and text and opinion papers. Studies with staff nurses and experiences working with nurse managers were included. Studies that examined emotional intelligence of nurse managers, in any context, related to staff job satisfaction and retention in nursing and/or that discussed tools used to measure nurse managers' emotional intelligence were considered for inclusion. This review followed JBI methodology for scoping reviews. Key information sources searched included CINAHL (EBSCO), Health and Psychosocial Instruments (EBSCO), Scopus (Elsevier), EBSCO Health Source (EBSCO), JBI Database of Systematic Reviews and Implementation Reports (Ovid), ERIC (EBSCO), WorldWideScience (Worldwidescience.com), Wiley Online Library (Onlinelibrary.wiley.com), ProQuest Dissertations and Theses (ProQuest), MedNar (MedNar.com), Google Scholar (GoogleScholar.com), and ScienceDirect (Elsevier). Studies published in English from 1995 to September 2019 were included in the review. Two independent reviewers assessed titles and abstracts against the inclusion criteria. Studies that met the inclusion criteria were retrieved in full and assessed in detail. The data extraction tool was developed by the authors to examine information retrieved. Eight quantitative studies were included, all from the United States. The studies included 232 nurse manager participants and 3731 staff nurse participants from academic and non-academic hospitals. Seven of the eight studies used the Mayer-Salovey-Caruso Emotional Intelligence Test to measure nurse manager emotional intelligence, and one study used the Emotional Quotient Inventory 2.0. Of the eight included studies, six studies showed no significant relationship between emotional intelligence and nurse job satisfaction and/or retention, one revealed a positive correlation, and one revealed both positive and negative correlations. Limited research exists to determine whether nurse manager emotional intelligence plays a role in staff nurse job satisfaction and/or retention. All studies reported a need for further research, as well as the use of differing methodologies and a more diverse nursing population. This review may raise awareness among nurse managers as well as health care organizations about understanding and developing emotional intelligence.