SEARCH_TOPIC: Speech therapy
TITLE: Speech therapists' perspectives about using tele-speech therapy: a qualitative study.
PMID: 33724894
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33724894/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Tele-speech therapy refers to the application of telecommunication technologies to provide speech-language pathology services at a distance and establishes communication between a specialist and a patient for assessment, intervention, or consultation. Due to the shortage of speech therapists, the use of tele-speech therapy services can be helpful, especially for those who do not have access to speech-language therapists. The aim of this study was to investigate speech therapists' perspectives about using tele-speech therapy. This was a qualitative study conducted in 2020. Data were collected through conducting in-depth semi-structured interviews with 12 faculty members who worked in three different medical universities. The interviews were recorded digitally and transcribed verbatim. The data were analysed by using framework analysis method and MAXQDA version 10. Having analysed the data, four themes, 10 categories, and 26 subcategories emerged. The main findings included necessary requirements for implementing and using tele-speech therapy in terms of developing academic courses, guidelines, and necessary technical infrastructure, advantages of using tele-speech therapy for specialists and patients, challenges of, and opportunities for, using tele-speech therapy. Although tele-speech therapy has several benefits for specialists and patients, challenges of using this technology should not be underestimated. There are also a number of research opportunities in this field and their results can be helpful for successful implementation of this technology in the future.Implications for rehabilitationThe clinical assessment and treatment of patients with speech-language disorders are sometimes difficult mainly due to the limited healthcare resources or the patient heath condition.Tele-speech therapy can be regarded as an alternative approach or a complementary method for face-to-face visits, especially for patients who are not able to attend clinics.Despite the advantages, the challenges of providing special groups of patients with tele-speech therapy should be taken into account.Telerehabiliation and rehabilitation research centres can support future research in the field of tele-speech therapy to present more evidence regarding the strengths and weaknesses of this technology.Implications for practiceTechnical and non-technical infrastructures should be taken into account before implementing tele-speech therapy services.Tele-speech therapy has a number of advantages for patients and specialists.Challenges of providing tele-speech therapy services, such as risk of inaccurate evaluation and difficulty in interaction with patients should not be underestimated.There are a number of research opportunities in the field of tele-speech therapy and tele-rehabilitation centres can support further research in this area.The findings of this study can facilitate utilisation of tele-speech therapy in different settings.