SEARCH_TOPIC: Cognitive rehabilitation
TITLE: Virtual reality and cognitive rehabilitation for older adults with mild cognitive impairment: A systematic review.
PMID: 38036103
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38036103/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Virtual Reality (VR) has been gaining increasing attention as a potential ecological and effective intervention system for treating Mild Cognitive Impairment (MCI). However, it remains unclear the efficacy and effectiveness of VR-based cognitive rehabilitation therapy (VR-CRT) in comparison with cognitive rehabilitation therapy (CRT). Consequently, a systematic review on Pubmed, Scopus, PsycInfo, and Web Of Science was conducted to assess the state of the art of the literature published between 2003 and April 2023. Only articles that adopted CRT as control group and that included some measure of at least one domain among overall cognitive function, executive function and functional status were included. Participants needed to be older adults aged 65 or over with a diagnosis of MCI. The risk of bias and the quality of evidence were assessed using the Version 2 of the Cochrane risk-of-bias tool for randomized trials. Initially, 6503 records were considered and screened after removing duplicates (n = 1321). Subsequently, 81 full texts were assessed for eligibility. Four articles met the inclusion criteria but 2 of them were merged as they were describing different outcomes of the same research project. Consequently, 3 overall studies with a total of 130 participants were included in the final analysis. Due to the high heterogeneity in the methodology and outcome measures employed, it was not possible to conduct a meta-analysis. Included studies used semi-immersive (k = 2) and full-immersive (k = 1) VR systems in their research. Two articles evaluated overall cognitive function through the MoCA together with specific tests for executive functions (n = 69), while one study adopted a comprehensive neuropsychological battery to evaluate both cognitive function and executive function (n = 61). Finally, one study evaluated functional status through instrumental activities of daily living (n = 34). A However, the limited number of studies, the small sample size, and the potential issues with the quality and methodology of these studies that emerged from the risk of bias assessment may raise doubts about the reliability of their results. Nevertheless, although scarce, results of the present review suggest that VR-CRT may be paramount in treating MCI for its additional ecological and adaptive advantages, as all of the studies highlighted that it was at least as effective as conventional CRT for all the outcome measures. Therefore, more rigorous research that compares VR-CRT and CRT is needed to understand the degree to which VR-CRT is effective with older adults with MCI and the potential role of immersion to influence its efficacy. Indeed, these preliminary findings highlight the need for the development of standardized VR protocols, as the integration of such technology into clinical practice may help improve the quality of life and cognitive outcomes for this growing demographic.