SEARCH_TOPIC: Surgery preparation
TITLE: Examining the Most Impactful Strategies for In-service Preparation: A Systemic Review.
PMID: 38971679
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38971679/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Resident performance on the Plastic Surgery In-Service Examination (PSITE) is used as a predictor of success on the American Board of Plastic Surgery Written Examination, as well as resident progression and fellowship applications. However, information specifically addressing strategies on optimal PSITE preparation is lacking in the plastic surgery literature when compared to general surgery. For this reason, we aim to understand if the topic is well-studied and denote effective study strategies and curricular interventions in both fields that can help residents and programs optimize PSITE performance. A literature search including studies from 2012 to 2022 was conducted following PRISMA guidelines in PubMed and EMBASE to identify articles on strategies to improve in-service exam scores for general surgery and plastic surgery. Only studies that reported measurable outcomes in raw score, percentile score, or percent correct were included. Qualitative analysis of 30 articles revealed 2 categories of interventions: individual study habits and institutional curricular interventions. In general surgery literature, 27 articles examined interventions positively impacting resident ABSITE scores, with 21 studies classified as institutional curricular interventions and 6 articles addressing individual study habits. Themes associated with improved ABSITE performance included mandatory remediation programs, dedicated study time, and problem-based learning interventions. In contrast, only 3 articles in plastic surgery literature discussed interventions associated with improved PSITE scores, all falling under curricular interventions. Unfortunately, the plastic surgery literature lacks concrete evidence on how residents can improve performance. Future research in plastic surgery should replicate successful strategies from general surgery and further investigate optimal preparation strategies for the PSITE. Such endeavors can contribute to improving resident performance and advancing plastic surgery education and patient care.