SEARCH_TOPIC: Exercise for pregnancy
TITLE: Physical Activity Programs during Pregnancy Are Effective for the Control of Gestational Diabetes Mellitus.
PMID: 32847106
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32847106/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Gestational diabetes mellitus has an incidence of 14% worldwide and nursing is responsible for its monitoring during pregnancy. Excessive weight gain during pregnancy is directly related to gestational diabetes mellitus development. Gestational diabetes mellitus (GDM) has negative repercussions on the evolution of the pregnancy and the fetus. The objective of this systematic review is to establish how physical activity influences pregnant women with gestational diabetes mellitus and to analyze what benefits physical activity has in the control of gestational diabetes mellitus. A systematic search was carried out in different databases (Cochrane, Superior Council of Scientific Investigations (CSIC), EBSCOhost, Pubmed, Scopus, Web os Science, and Proquest) for papers published within the last 12 years, taking into account different inclusion and exclusion criteria. Six randomized controlled studies and one observational case-control study of a high quality were selected. Fasting, postprandial glucose and HbcA1 were assessed, as well as the requirement and amount of insulin used. Thus, there is a positive relationship between the performance of physical activity and the control of gestational diabetes mellitus. Resistance, aerobic exercise, or a combination of both are effective for the control of glucose, HbcA1, and insulin. Due to the variability of the exercises of the analyzed studies and the variability of the shape of the different pregnant women, it does not permit the recommendation of a particular type of exercise. However, any type of physical activity of sufficient intensity and duration can have benefits for pregnant women with GDM. Pregnant women with gestational diabetes mellitus should exercise for at least 20-50 min a minimum of 2 times a week with at a least moderate intensity.