SEARCH_TOPIC: Dental implants
TITLE: Fabrication of dental implants by the additive manufacturing method: A systematic review.
PMID: 30928226
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/30928226/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Placement of dental implants depends, among other factors, on anatomic conditions such as sufficient bone height and thickness. Thus, individualized dental implants seem to offer benefits for patients with alveolar bone resorption. Additive manufacturing has allowed for the fabrication of custom implants with microscale resolution and, although the efficiency of the process is unclear, is a potential process for manufacturing dental implants. The purpose of this systematic review was to evaluate the current situation of additive manufacturing techniques for fabricating dental implants. An electronic search was performed in the databases PubMed, Lilacs, Cochrane Library, and Science Direct, with the terms "additive manufacturing" AND "dental implants," "rapid prototyping" AND "dental implants," "3 D printing" AND "dental implants," "electron beam melting" AND "dental implants," "selective laser melting" AND "dental implants." The articles were screened, and the final selection of articles was obtained by using the inclusion and exclusion criteria. The database search resulted in 1322 articles, which were screened for title and/or summary according to the inclusion criteria. From the selected 38 articles, 30 remained after applying the exclusion criteria. These were read completely, resulting in a selection of 13 articles for this systematic review. Owing to the great variety of articles with different objectives, the results were based on a descriptive analysis of the following topics: additive manufacturing technique and material, printed structure and implant design, implant characteristics, mechanical analysis, surface treatment, and osseointegration. Additive manufacturing is a new technology that may solve many problems in diverse fields. In dentistry, however, further studies are needed to improve the method for manufacturing custom dental implants because no standard methodology is available. Moreover, the advantages and disadvantages of the process are not yet clearly defined.