SEARCH_TOPIC: Tubal ligation
TITLE: Denial of tubal ligation in religious hospitals: Consumer attitudes when insurance limits hospital choice.
PMID: 33657425
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33657425/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Postpartum tubal ligation provides demonstrated benefits to women, but access to this procedure is threatened by restrictions at Catholic healthcare institutions. We aimed to understand how insured employees assign responsibility for postpartum sterilization denial and how it impacts their view of the quality of care provided. We conducted a nationally representative, cross-sectional survey of employees at Standard and Poor's (S&P) 500 companies utilizing a dual panel drawn from Amerispeak, a probability-based research panel, and a non-probability panel. Respondents answered questions about a scenario of a woman denied a tubal ligation due to Catholic hospital policy when her employer-sponsored insurance provided no other hospital choices. Of 1113 eligible panel members, 1001 (90%) completed the survey. Weighted analysis accounted for complex survey design. In response to the tubal ligation denial scenario, 42% of respondents rated hospital quality-of-care as poor or very poor. Sixty percent felt that something should have been done differently, with about half assigning responsibility to the religiously-affiliated hospital for not providing the procedure and half to the insurance company for not including secular hospitals in its network. Finding employers/insurance companies responsible was more common with higher education (RRR = 3.17; 95% CI: 1.58-6.33 some college; RRR = 4.26; 95% CI: 2.10-8.62 bachelor's or more) and less common among non-white respondents (RRR = 0.54; 95% CI: 0.31-0.97). Three quarters of respondents thought the employer should have intervened. The majority of insured employees do not think women should be denied postpartum tubal ligation. They assign hospitals, insurers, and employers responsibility to remove barriers to care. Most people who receive health insurance through a large employer disapprove of Catholic hospital restrictions when the patient's insurance restricts her hospital choice. To improve access to comprehensive reproductive care, employers and insurers should assure employees have in-network coverage of hospitals without religious restrictions.