SEARCH_TOPIC: Micronutrients
TITLE: Associations of micronutrients exposure with cadmium body burden among population: A systematic review.
PMID: 37060803
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37060803/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The absorption and accumulation of cadmium (Cd) within the human body can be influenced by the status of certain micronutrients, while available evidence for the association between micronutrient exposure and Cd body burden remains fragmented and inconsistent. To address this issue, this article reviews and synthesizes epidemiological studies that examine the association between micronutrient exposure and Cd burden in humans, to elucidate the potential association between micronutrient exposure and Cd body burden. We conducted a systematic review of epidemiologic studies reporting the association between micronutrient status and Cd body burden among the population. Relevant articles were selected based on predetermined criteria from PubMed, Web of Science, and Scopus databases published from 2000 to 2021. The exposures that were evaluated included micronutrients (zinc, selenium, iron, calcium, and vitamins) status or intakes of them. The outcome of interest was the Cd body burden as indicated by blood Cd or urinary Cd levels. The quality of included studies was assessed using The Joanna Briggs Institute critical appraisal tool. We extracted data from each article, including study design, study site, study population, micronutrient status, Cd body burden, and the correlations between micronutrient status and Cd body burden. Our systematic search yielded 1660 articles. Of these, forty-four were selected for inclusion based on prespecified criteria. These selected articles evaluated the relationship between Cd body burden and seven different micronutrients, namely, selenium (Se), zinc (Zn), calcium (Ca), iron (Fe), vitamin A, vitamin B12, and vitamin D. The majority of studies (n = 41) were observational, while only three were randomized controlled trials. Among the seventeen studies assessing Zn status, ten reported a negative association between serum Zn levels or intake and urinary and blood Cd levels. Results were inconsistent among the ten studies examining the association between Se levels and Cd body burden. Six studies showed that Cd in blood and urine was negatively correlated with serum ferritin (SF), a biomarker of body Fe status. Two studies reported a negative correlation between Ca and blood Cd. This synthesis of available evidence suggests that certain micronutrients, especially Zn and Fe, may play a role in reducing the Cd body burden among populations. The evidence strongly supports a negative association between Zn, Fe, and Cd body burden, whereas evidence for Se, Ca and vitamins is insufficient to draw definitive conclusions regarding their relationship with Cd body burden. In addition, observational studies limit the ability to infer a causal relationship between micronutrients and Cd body burden, highlighting the need for additional intervention studies. Our review may inform nutrient supplementation guidance, control of Cd body burden, and future research to mitigate the adverse health effects of Cd in the context of global Cd pollution.