SEARCH_TOPIC: Sedentary lifestyle risks
TITLE: Sedentary lifestyle, physical activity, and gastrointestinal diseases: evidence from mendelian randomization analysis.
PMID: 38583262
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38583262/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The causal associations of physical activity and sedentary behavior with the risk of gastrointestinal disease are unclear. We performed a Mendelian randomization analysis to examine these associations. Genetic instruments associated with leisure screen time (LST, an indicator of a sedentary lifestyle) and moderate-to-vigorous intensity physical activity (MVPA) at the genome-wide significance (P < 5 × 10<sup>-8</sup>) level were selected from a genome-wide association study. Summary statistics for gastrointestinal diseases were obtained from the UK Biobank study, the FinnGen study, and large consortia. Multivariable MR analyses were conducted for genetically determined LST with adjustment for MVPA and vice versa. We also performed multivariable MR with adjustment for genetically proxied smoking, body mass index (BMI), waist-to-hip ratio, type 2 diabetes, and fasting insulin for both exposures. Genetically proxied longer LST was associated with an increased risk of gastrointestinal reflux, gastric ulcer, duodenal ulcer, chronic gastritis, irritable bowel syndrome, diverticular disease, Crohn's disease, ulcerative colitis, non-alcoholic fatty liver disease, alcoholic liver disease, cholangitis, cholecystitis, cholelithiasis, acute pancreatitis, chronic pancreatitis, and acute appendicitis. Most associations remained after adjustment for genetic liability to MVPA. Genetic liability to MVPA was associated with decreased risk of gastroesophageal reflux, gastric ulcer, chronic gastritis, irritable bowel syndrome, cholecystitis, cholelithiasis, acute and chronic pancreatitis. The associations attenuated albeit directionally remained after adjusting for genetically predicted LST. Multivariable MR analysis found that BMI and type 2 diabetes mediated the associations of LST and MVPA with several gastrointestinal diseases. The study suggests that a sedentary lifestyle may play a causal role in the development of many gastrointestinal diseases. Natural Science Fund for Distinguished Young Scholars of Zhejiang Province (LR22H260001), Natural Science Foundation of Hunan Province (2021JJ30999), Swedish Heart-Lung Foundation (Hjärt-Lungfonden, 20210351), Swedish Research Council (Vetenskapsrådet, 2019-00977), Swedish Cancer Society (Cancerfonden), the Wellcome Trust (225790/7/22/Z), United Kingdom Research and Innovation Medical Research Council (MC_UU_00002/7) and National Institute for Health Research Cambridge Biomedical Research Centre (NHIR203312).