SEARCH_TOPIC: Teeth whitening
TITLE: Present status and future directions - Managing discoloured teeth.
PMID: 35188275
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35188275/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Managing tooth discolouration involves a range of different protocols for clinicians and patients in order to achieve an aesthetic result. There is an increasing public awareness in the appearance of their teeth and management of tooth discolouration may be inter-disciplinary and involve both vital and nonvital teeth. Vital teeth can be easily treated with low concentration hydrogen peroxide products safely and effectively using an external approach and trays. For endodontically treated teeth, the walking bleach technique with hydrogen releasing peroxide products is popular. However, there is an association with external cervical root resorption with higher concentrations of hydrogen peroxide of 30%-35%. There are also regulatory considerations for the use of hydrogen peroxide in certain jurisdictions internationally. Prosthodontic treatments are more invasive and involve loss of tooth structure as well as a life cycle of further treatment in the future. This narrative review is based on searches on PubMed and the Cochrane library. Bleaching endodontically treated teeth can be considered a safe and effective protocol in the management of discoloured teeth. However, the association between bleaching and resorption remains unclear although there is likely to be a relation to prior trauma. It is prudent to avoid thermocatalytic approaches and to use a base/sealer to cover the root filling. An awareness expectations of patients and multidisciplinary treatment considerations is important in achieving the aesthetic result for the patient. It is likely that there will be an increasing demand for aesthetic whitening treatments. Bleaching of teeth has also become increasingly regulated although there are international differences in the use and concentration of bleaching agents.