SEARCH_TOPIC: Cognitive behavioral therapy
TITLE: Cognitive- behavioral psychotherapy of patients with tinnitus.
PMID: 34052789
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34052789/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
In this work 112 studies were reviewed and 21 of them were considered as more reliable and more credible. It is well known that Cognitive-Behavioural Therapy (CBT) is the most valid approach regarding its effectiveness. There are many variations of CBT used in patients with tinnitus, but the most effective appears to be the Cognitive-Behavioural Acceptance and Commitment Therapy. Also, treatment-variations consist in the use of hearing aids, and psycho-education. The Acceptance and Commitment Therapy is a third-generation psychological intervention invented by Steven Hayes in 1986. This therapy also applies to the treatment of many psychological problems, such as depression, anxiety, psychoses and substance use problems, and chronic diseases. The purpose of this therapy is not to reduce symptoms, but to improve health and behaviour changes in order for the patient to accept the inevitable pain involved in his/her condition. There are other forms of therapy that come from the broader spectrum of CBT, such as book-therapy (self-help method), rehabilitation treatment of tinnitus, and the Axiological Model based solely on cognitive psychotherapy inspired by the CBT founder, Aaron Beck. Because the latter treatment is at its first steps, there is no literature yet, and it must be considered as an experimental model. It is also well known that intervention with CBT could significantly reduce the anxiety and stress caused by tinnitus. The CBT technique incorporates many elements used to treat tinnitus, such as self-assessment, applied relaxation, cognitive restructuring, behavioral activation, and positive mental imagery. Finally, it becomes apparent that the tinnitus problem, which is serious for these patients, is increasingly affecting the psychiatric and psychotherapeutic communities.