SEARCH_TOPIC: Narcissistic personality disorder
TITLE: Tracing the Link Between Narcissistic Personality Disorder and Childhood Overgratification.
PMID: 39610593
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39610593/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Narcissistic personality disorder (NPD) is a psychiatric disorder that remains largely undiagnosed in modern society. Theories claim that the roots of this disorder can often be traced back to childhood experiences and parenting styles. The prevalence of NPD in the general population is estimated to be significantly high, although rates may vary widely depending on the assessment method and population being considered as a significant portion of the population remains largely unaware of this disorder or though the patient is aware of his/her condition, the bad reputation for the illness demotivates him/her from seeking professional help. This is the main reason why it is difficult to know the real prevalence of these disorders that are so frequently encountered in psychiatric practice but still largely undiagnosed. This review collects and analyzes several research studies and literature reviews found in the electronic databases. The inclusion criteria prioritize studies focusing on the effect of overgratification on the development of NPD. Empirical evidence suggests a link between childhood overgratification and the development of narcissistic traits in adulthood. However, the relationship between childhood overgratification and NPD is much more complex and is deeply influenced by various factors, such as parent-child attachment, individual nature, and cultural context. This paper aims to simplify and illustrate the complex interplay between childhood overgratification and the manifestation of NPD, thereby revealing underlying mechanisms and identifying potential interventions for treatment. This article explores the intriguing correlation between NPD and overgratification during childhood, exploring how early indulgence may sow the seeds for narcissistic personality traits in adulthood.