SEARCH_TOPIC: Protein intake
TITLE: Dietary protein intake and changes in muscle mass measurements in community-dwelling middle-aged and older adults: A prospective cohort study.
PMID: 37922694
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37922694/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Increasing dietary protein intake can be an efficient strategy to prevent sarcopenia. Nevertheless, due to the discrepancy in the population and their dietary pattern, evidence suggested the effects of dietary protein amount or source on sarcopenia prevention varies. This prospective cohort study investigated the correlation between dietary protein intakes or sources and changes in muscle mass measurements. Additionally, the study explored the link between dietary protein and the prevalence of sarcopenia. Participants aged 40 to 75 were from Guangzhou Nutrition and Health Study (GNHS) 2011-2013 and returned in 2014-2017. Validated 79-item food frequency questionnaires were applied to calculate the amount of total, animal, and plant protein intakes and animal-to-plant protein ratio (APR). The body composition was examined by dual-energy x-ray absorptiometry (DXA) to calculate the appendicular lean mass (ALM) and its index (ASMI). Sarcopenia was diagnosed based on the 2019 Asia Working Group of Sarcopenia's criteria. ANCOVA was utilized to compare the differences of Δ ALM and Δ ASMI across the quartiles of the dietary protein, and linear regression was employed to examine dose-response associations. Multilinear mixed-effect models were employed to evaluate whether protein intake relates to annual changes in ALM and ASMI. Multivariable logistic regressions were performed to analyze the associations between dietary protein and sarcopenia. In total, 2709 participants during the 3.2-year follow-up period were considered eligible for analysis. Higher dietary protein intakes (total, animal, plant) in both sexes could preserve more ALM and ASMI in a dose-response manner (all P<sub>-trend</sub> < 0.05). The annual estimated preservations of ASMI were greater in the highest dietary protein intakes (total, animal, plant) quartile than the lowest (0.05-0.13 kg/m<sup>2</sup>/y, all P < 0.05). In women, the risk of sarcopenia was reduced by 35%-50 % in the highest protein intake (total, animal, plant) quartile than the lowest. The APR did not display any significant associations. Higher dietary protein intake, regardless of animal or plant sources, is associated with less muscle loss and a lower prevalence of sarcopenia in middle-aged and older Chinese, particularly women. NCT03179657.