SEARCH_TOPIC: Chemotherapy
TITLE: Neoadjuvant or Adjuvant Chemotherapy in Soft-Tissue Sarcoma?
PMID: 40153167
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/40153167/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The review compares the effectiveness of neoadjuvant(pre-operative, NAC) and adjuvant(post-operative, AC) in Soft Tissue Sarcomas as this topic is controvesial and multiple new studies have been over the years. Sarculator and other nomograms assess patients with a predicted 10-year OS below 60% who will benefit from perioperative chemotherapy. Further research supports perioperative chemotherapy's role. European guidelines do not recommend anthracycline and ifosfamide (AI) perioperative chemotherapy as a standard treatment for STS of the extremities and trunk. However, some studies show that AI chemotherapy can improve recurrence-free survival (RFS). The EORTC 62,771 trial found that the CYVADIC regimen (doxorubicin, dacarbazine, cyclophosphamide, vincristine) reduced RFS without affecting OS. Meanwhile, the EORTC 62,931 trial showed no effect of AI chemotherapy on RFS or OS, but a pooled analysis suggested an OS benefit for patients with R1 (microscopically positive) resections. The AI regimen shows further support from Sarculator-based data, with EORTC 62,931 analysis indicating an improvement in disease-free survival and OS in patients with low expected OS. Similar outcomes were seen in the ISG-STS 1001 study. Recently, PERSARC analysis revealed that AI chemotherapy significantly improves OS in high-grade STS patients with a low 5-year OS prediction (< 33%). NAC improves the chances of complete tumour removal, especially in large, high-grade tumours. It often reduces the need for more aggressive surgeries by shrinking tumours before surgery, leading to higher rates of successful resections with clear margins (R0). Sarculator and other nomograms assess patients with a predicted 10-year OS below 60% who will benefit from perioperative chemotherapy. Further research supports perioperative chemotherapy's role.