SEARCH_TOPIC: E. coli infection
TITLE: Comparison of three doses of amikacin on alternate days with a daily dose of meropenem during the same period for the treatment of urinary tract infection with E. coli: a double-blind clinical trial.
PMID: 38273327
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38273327/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Urinary tract infections (UTIs) are very common infections in humans, and Escherichia coli (E. coli) is the commonest pathogen leading to UTIs. The generation of beta-lactamase enzymes in this bacterium results in its resistance against many antibiotics. This study compares three doses of amikacin on alternate days with a daily dose of meropenem in the same period for the treatment of UTIs with E. coli in a double-blind clinical trial. The current double-blind clinical trial compares three doses of amikacin on alternate days with a daily dose of meropenem in the same period for the treatment of UTIs with E. coli. The patients were assigned to two groups: Intervention (receiving a single dose of amikacin once a day at 48-h intervals for a week, three doses) and control (receiving meropenem for 1/TDS for a week). The E. coli infection frequency was 61 (21 cases of non-ESBL and 40 cases of ESBL-positive infections) and the frequency of the other infections was 52 (46%). In the patients with ESBL E. coli infection, ciprofloxacin (21; 70%) showed the highest antibiotic resistance, and nitrofurantoin (33; 91.7%) showed the highest sensitivity. The baseline variables between the control and intervention groups indicated no significant difference (p > 0.05). The frequency of signs and symptoms showed no significant difference between the amikacin and meropenem groups in the first 24 h and the first week. In the second week of follow-up, no clinical signs or symptoms were observed in the two groups. The results of this study showed that treatment with amikacin, 1 g q48h, for one week (three doses) has the same result as meropenem, 1 g q8h, for one week (21 doses). The results are the same for the treatment of UTIs with ESBL positive and ESBL negative. Amikacin can be used once every 48 h to treat UTIs, is less expensive and can be administered on an outpatient basis. This study was registered in the Iranian Registry of Clinical Trials (IRCT) with ID number: IRCT20170417033483N2 on the date 2018-02-13.