SEARCH_TOPIC: Aging population challenges
TITLE: Aging Population Challenges and the Role of Thai Adolescents in Caring for the Elderly: A Cross-Sectional Study.
PMID: 38784999
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38784999/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
This cross-sectional study aimed to investigate the perspective and caregiving practices of Thai adolescents towards the elderly in the Northeastern region of Thailand. The study was carried out during July 1st to September 30th, 2023 among 1,551 participants in grades 4-6 from eight randomly selected schools. The analyzing using descriptive statistics. The results found that the average age was 15.30±1.66 years old, 62.4% were female, and most lived with their parents and relatives. About 36.4% of parents have experienced either widowhood or separation, 69.4% of families had a monthly income less than 15,000 THB. While 33.7% had an elderly person in the family, 1.6% lived with bedridden patients, and 40.3% required assistance in daily activities such as cooking, mobility, while 58.7% had diabetes and high blood pressure. 59.3% did not have a primary caregiver in the family, only parents or relatives usually taking on this role. Adolescent grandchildren spent the majority of their time on education. Almost one of three rarely took care of the elderly, even though their parents and teachers taught about moral responsibility. Regarding the belief in the merit that would arise from taking care of the elderly, one of five was indifferent or did not believe, while half of them believed to some extent. From self-assessment of their ability to take care of the elderly, most were in the moderate and low levels, despite receiving information from family, teachers, or various media. The predominant perspective is that caregiving is perceived as the responsibility of parents or health professionals, and the belief that the elderly is captious and irksome. Therefore, it is advisable to present policy-oriented information across education, health, and societal dimensions to support children and young people to learn about elderly individuals and instilling their responsibility within families and societies, fostering a sustainable and well-being-oriented community.