SEARCH_TOPIC: Food safety guidelines
TITLE: Regional Water and Food Security Require Joint Israeli-Palestinian Guidelines for Wastewater Reuse and Food Safety.
PMID: 39660400
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39660400/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Water and food security in Israel and the Palestinian Authority are deeply interconnected due to the region's arid climate and water scarcity, shared water resources, and interrelated agricultural sectors. Therefore, jointly addressing water reuse is vital to supporting sustainable agricultural production and ensuring food safety. This paper examines the food safety implications of the cross-border trade of fresh fruits and vegetables between the Palestinian Authority and Israel, with an emphasis on the influence of, water technologies, agricultural practices, and environmental health. This paper provides a comprehensive review of existing data to assess water irrigation quality, food safety, and water reuse regulations in the Palestinian Authority and Israel. Significant discrepancies in food safety, food quality, and exposure to contaminants from fresh produce result from different water reuse regulations, practices, and socioeconomic conditions. Given the volume of trade, consumer mobility, and environmental sustainability, coupled with geopolitical limitations between the Palestinian Authority and Israel, there is an urgent need for a unified regulatory strategy for wastewater reuse ensuring food safety and security. We propose a single, coordinated approach to overseeing wastewater reuse to enhance public health and address contaminants of emerging concern that are not currently regulated. Navigating the political and legislative complexities in a proactive stance requires both Israeli and Palestinian decision-makers to address the matter conscientiously. Existing data and the precautionary principle are sufficient to propose an interim prohibition on treated wastewater irrigation for leafy vegetables to mitigate pollution risks and act as a catalyst for improving irrigation water quality. Our proposed strategy for a unified water reuse regulation emphasizes the necessary steps for its implementation and addresses potential obstacles. This strategy underscores the importance of responsible wastewater management in advancing common goals of environmental sustainability, food safety, and human health. We propose a coordinated Israeli-Palestinian approach to wastewater reuse to ensure food safety based on shared environmental and health concerns, economic considerations, and the precautionary principle. A Call for Joint Israeli-Palestinian Guidelines for Water Recycling to Improve Food Security and Safety.