SEARCH_TOPIC: Exercise for seniors
TITLE: Effects of dual-task resistance exercise on cognition, mood, depression, functional fitness, and activities of daily living in older adults with cognitive impairment: a single-blinded, randomized controlled trial.
PMID: 38658827
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38658827/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Regular exercise is emphasized for the improvement of functional capacity and independence of older adults. This study aimed to compare the effects of a dual-task resistance exercise program and resistance exercise on cognition, mood, depression, physical function, and activities of daily living (ADL) in older adults with cognitive impairment. A total of 44 older adults participated in the study. Participants were randomly allocated to an experimental group (n = 22) performing a dual-task resistance exercise program for cognitive function improvement and a control group (n = 22) performing a resistance exercise program. Both groups performed the exercise for 40 min per session, three times a week, for 6 weeks (18 sessions). Cognition, mood, depression, functional fitness, and ADL were quantified before and after the intervention using the Mini-Mental State Examination (MMSE), profile of mood states (POMS), geriatric depression scale (GDS), senior fitness test (SFT), and Korean version of ADL, respectively. There was a significant time and group interaction on the MMSE (p = 0.044). There were no significant time and group interactions in the POMS, GDS, SFT, or ADL. Cognitive function (p < 0.001), mood (p < 0.001), depression (p < 0.001), functional fitness (p < 0.001), and ADL (p < 0.001) significantly improved after dual-task resistance exercise, and cognitive function (p < 0.001), mood (p < 0.001), depression (p < 0.001), functional fitness (p < 0.001), and ADL (p < 0.001) significantly improved after resistance exercise. Dual-task resistance exercise is more effective than resistance exercise in improving cognitive function in older adults with cognitive impairment. Both dual-task resistance exercise and resistance exercise improves mood, depression, functional fitness, and ADL after the intervention. We propose using dual-task resistance exercises for cognitive and physical health management in the older adults with cognitive impairment. This study was registered with the Clinical Research Information Service (WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform) (Registration ID, KCT0005389; Registration date, 09/09/2020).