SEARCH_TOPIC: Childhood obesity
TITLE: Indian Academy of Pediatrics Revised Guidelines on Evaluation, Prevention and Management of Childhood Obesity.
PMID: 38087786
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38087786/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The last guidelines for pediatric obesity were released in 2004 by Indian Academy of Pediatrics (IAP). Since then, there has been an alarming increase in prevalence and a significant shift in our understanding in the pathogenesis, risk factors, evaluation, and management of pediatric obesity and its complications. Thus, it was decided to revise and update the previous recommendations. To review the existing literature on the burden of childhood obesity and its underlying etiology and risk factors. To recommend evaluation of childhood obesity and suggest optimum prevention and management strategies of childhood obesity. The following IAP chapters (Pediatric and Adolescent Endocrinology, Infant and Young Child feeding, Nutrition, Non-Communicable Disease and Adolescent Health Academy) were invited to nominate members to become part of the writing committee. The Committee held discussions on various aspects of childhood obesity through online meetings between February and August, 2023. Recommendations were then formulated, which were analyzed, revised and approved by all members of the Committee. Exogenous or primary obesity accounts for the majority of cases of childhood obesity. It is important to differentiate it from endogenous or secondary obesity as evaluation and management changes depending on the cause. In Indian, in children under 5 years of age, weight for length/height using WHO charts, and in children 5-18 years, BMI using IAP 2015 charts is used to diagnose overweight and obesity. Waist circumference should be routinely measured in all overweight and obese children and plotted on India specific charts, as it is a key measure of cardio-metabolic risk. Routine evaluation for endocrine causes is not recommended, except in short and obese children with additional diagnostic clues. All obese children more than ten years old should be evaluated for comorbidities like hypertension, dyslipidemia, hyperglycemia and non-alcoholic fatty liver disease/metabolic dysfunction associated steatotic liver disease (NAFLD/ MASLD). Prevention and management of childhood obesity mainly involves healthy diet practices, daily moderate to vigorous physical activity and reduced screen time. Pharmacotherapy may be offered as an addition to lifestyle interventions only in cases of class 3 obesity or if there are any life-threatening comorbidities. Finally, surgical management may be offered in children older than 12 years of age with class 2 obesity and associated comorbidities or class 3 obesity with/without comorbidities, only after failure of a proper trial of intense lifestyle modifications and pharmacotherapy for at least 6 months.