SEARCH_TOPIC: Hyperthyroidism
TITLE: Perchlorates in the treatment of hyperthyroidism and thyrotoxicosis: a comprehensive review.
PMID: 38195966
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38195966/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Perchlorates are ionic inhibitors antagonizing iodine transport into thyrocytes, hampering thyroid hormone synthesis. Nevertheless, perchlorates are not considered as first-line treatment in hyperthyroidism and thyrotoxicosis as compared to other pharmacological and non-pharmacological interventions. Reassessing the therapeutic role of perchlorates in hyperthyroidism and thyrotoxicosis throughout a systematic review of the Literature. Guidelines were searched and examined to summarize current recommendations on the use of perchlorates in the management of hyperthyroidism. Randomized and non-randomized clinical trials were also searched and reviewed to summarize the efficacy/effectiveness and safety of perchlorates in hyperthyroidisms and thyrotoxicosis. The management of specific forms of hyperthyroidism was considered, including Graves' disease (GD) in non-pregnant adults, hyperthyroidisms in pregnancy, iodine media contrast-induced hyperthyroidism, amiodarone-induced hyperthyroidisms, and thyroid storm. Most of the reported studies had remarkable limitations in terms of study design (non-controlled trials, lack of blinding), low number of participants, and the lack of clinically relevant endpoints, such as cardiovascular events, cardiovascular mortality, and teratogenicity. Overall, perchlorates could be considered a second-line treatment after thionamides, radioiodine, and total thyroidectomy in both GD and hyperthyroidisms in pregnancy. The therapeutic potential of perchlorates alone or in combination with other agents could be considered a second-line treatment of iodine-related hyperthyroidisms and thyroid storm. Despite the low level of evidence, perchlorates could be considered in such specific forms of thyroid disorders, including iodine-induced hyperthyroidism and thyroid storm.