SEARCH_TOPIC: Sun safety
TITLE: Photoprotection: Current developments and controversies.
PMID: 38924160
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38924160/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
This review aimed at summarizing some of the key points that were discussed during the photoprotection session at the International Forum of Dermatology in 2022. This international conference was designed to address prominent topics of clinical dermatology in a holistic way, allowing to articulate multiple viewpoints. Therefore, this review does not claim to be exhaustive, but is instead intended to give an overview of recent developments and ongoing controversies in the field of photoprotection. Cumulative ultraviolet radiation (UVR) exposure is the major aetiological factor in the development of photoageing, photoimunosuppression and photocarcinogenesis. UVA (320-400 nm) penetrates into the dermis and damages DNA and other intracellular and acellular targets primarily by generating reactive oxygen species (ROS). It is the major contributor to photoageing, characterized by fine and coarse wrinkles, dyspigmentation and loss of elasticity. UVB (290-320 nm) is responsible for sunburns through direct damage to DNA by the formation of 6-4 cyclobutane pyrimidine dimers (CPDs) and pyrimidine 6-4 pyrimidone photoproducts. Both UVA and UVB exposure increase the risk of basal cell carcinoma, squamous cell carcinoma and melanoma. In recent years, visible light (VL; 400-700 nm) has also been implicated in the exacerbation of conditions aggravated by sun exposure such as hyperpigmentation and melasma. Photoprotection is a critical health strategy to reduce the deleterious effects of UVR and VL. Comprehensive photoprotection strategies include staying in the shade when outdoors, wearing photoprotective clothing including a wide-brimmed hat, and sunglasses, and the use of sunscreen. Due to the absorption of UV filters, the safety of sunscreens has been questioned. Newer sunscreens are becoming available with filters with absorption even beyond the UV spectrum, offering enhanced protection compared with older products. Prevention of photocarcinogenesis, sun-induced or sunlight-exacerbated hyperpigmentary conditions and drug-induced photosensitivity is an important reason for adopting comprehensive photoprotection strategies.