SEARCH_TOPIC: Natural birth
TITLE: Birthing balls to decrease labor pain and peanut balls to decrease length of labor: what is the evidence?
PMID: 36948997
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36948997/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Birthing balls and peanut balls have been used for decades by nurses and midwives as a nonpharmacologic adjunct to labor management based on anecdotal evidence. This article aimed to review the evidence regarding their safety and efficacy based on randomized controlled trials. Birthing balls are round exercise balls that a laboring individual can use for sitting, rocking, and pelvic rotation. The use of the birthing balls has been thought to increase maternal comfort and mimic upright positioning to widen the pelvic outlet for those laboring without an epidural. A recent meta-analysis showed that the use of the birthing ball in labor significantly reduces maternal pain in labor by 1.7 points on a standard visual analog scale of 1 to 10 (mean difference, -1.70 points; 95% confidence interval, -2.20 to -1.20). The use of the birthing ball does not significantly affect the mode of delivery or the rate of other obstetrical complications. This suggests that its use is safe and can offer subjective improvement in maternal pain experienced during labor. The peanut ball is a peanut-shaped plastic ball placed between the knees of a person laboring in the lateral recumbent position, a position common in those laboring with an epidural. Traditionally, its use has been thought to allow for bent-knee positioning that can mimic a squatting position and facilitate frequent and optimal position changes during labor. Data regarding the effects of the peanut ball are mixed. A recent systematic review and meta-analysis found that the use of the peanut ball compared with no peanut ball is associated with a significantly decreased first stage of labor (mean difference, -87.42 minutes; 95% confidence interval, -94.49 to -80.34) and an 11% higher relative risk of vaginal delivery (relative risk, 1.11; 95% confidence interval, 1.02-1.22; n=669). The use of the peanut ball is not associated with increased incidences of obstetrical complications. As such, it is reasonable to offer to individuals in labor. There has been no reported risk of the use of either the birthing ball or the peanut ball. As such, both interventions can be offered to individuals in labor as an adjunct to labor management techniques based on moderate quality evidence.