SEARCH_TOPIC: Screen time health
TITLE: Screen time among school-aged children of aged 6-14: a systematic review.
PMID: 37076910
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37076910/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Screen time refers to the time an individual spends using electronic or digital media devices such as televisions, smart phones, tablets or computers. The purpose of this study was to conduct systematic review to analyze the relevant studies on the length and use of screen time of school-aged children, in order to provide scientific basis for designing screen time interventions and perfecting the screen use guidelines for school-aged children. Screen time related studies were searched on PubMed, EMBASE, Clinical Trials, Controlled Trials, The WHO International Clinical Trials Registry Platform, the Cochrane Central Register of Controlled Trials, CNKI, and Whipple Journal databases from January 1, 2016 to October 31, 2021. Two researchers independently screened the literature and extracted the data, and adopted a qualitative analysis method to evaluate the research status of the length and usage of screen time of school-aged students. Fifty-three articles were included. Sixteen articles studied screen time length in the form of continuous variables. Thirty-seven articles studied screen time in the form of grouped variables. The average screen time of schoolchildren aged 6 to 14 was 2.77 h per day, and 46.4% of them had an average screen time ≥ 2 h per day. A growth trend could be roughly seen by comparing studies in the same countries and regions before and after the COVID-19 outbreak. The average rates of school-aged children who had screen time within the range of ≥ 2 h per day, were 41.3% and 59.4% respectively before and after January 2020. The main types of screen time before January 2020 were watching TV (20 literatures), using computers (16 literature), using mobile phones/tablets (4 literatures). The mainly uses of screens before January 2020 were entertainment (15 literatures), learning (5 literatures) and socializing (3 literatures). The types and mainly uses of screen time after January 2020 remained the same as the results before January 2020. Excessive screen time has become a common behavior among children and adolescents around the world. Intervention measures to control children's screen use should be explored in combination with different uses to reduce the proportion of non-essential uses.