SEARCH_TOPIC: Hypothyroidism
TITLE: Overt hypothyroidism in pregnancy and language development in offspring: is there an association?
PMID: 38498228
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38498228/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Overt hypothyroidism during pregnancy is linked to various obstetric complications, such as premature birth and fetal death. While some studies have shown that maternal hypothyroidism can impact a child's Intelligence Quotient (IQ) and language development, findings are controversial. The aim of this study was to explore the connection between treated maternal hypothyroidism during pregnancy and offspring neurodevelopment, focusing on learning and language and examining related maternal obstetric complications. Group 1 included 31 hypothyroid women with elevated thyroid stimulating hormone (TSH) (> 10 mU/L, > 10 µIU/mL) during pregnancy, and Group 2 had 21 euthyroid women with normal TSH levels (0.5-2.5 mU/L, 0.5-2.5 µIU/mL). Children underwent neuropsycological assessments using the Griffiths-II scale. Pregnancy outcome showed an average gestational age at delivery of 38.2 weeks for hypothyroid women, compared to 40 weeks for controls, and average birth weight of 2855.6 g versus 3285 g for controls, with hypothyroid women having children with higher intrauterine growth restriction (IUGR) prevalence and more caesarean sections. The 1-min APGAR score was lower for the hypothyroid group's children, at 8.85 versus 9.52. Neuropsychological outcomes showed children of hypothyroid mothers scored lower in neurocognitive development, particularly in the learning and language subscale (subscale C), with a notable correlation between higher maternal TSH levels and lower subscale scores. Fetuses born to hypothyroid mothers appeared to be at higher risk of IUGR and reduced APGAR score at birth. Neurocognitive development seemed to affect language performance more than the developmental quotient. This alteration appeared to correlate with the severity of hypothyroidism and its duration.