SEARCH_TOPIC: Infant mortality reduction
TITLE: The reduction of black infant mortality: an eighteen month evaluation of three Tennessee Black Health Care Task Forces' demonstration projects.
PMID: 10121848
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/10121848/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The problem of low birth weight has emerged as the single most important cause of infant death or subsequent handicaps in infancy and childhood. Although low birth weight babies (below 5.5 pounds) represent a small percentage of all babies born, well over half of all infant deaths occur among this group. The problem is even more serious for tiny infants. The relationship between infant mortality/morbidity and low birth weight has been known for many years and despite dramatic overall changes and medical advances, the incidence of low birth weight among high-risk populations continues to be a perennial problem. Efforts have been made nationally to develop programs that identify the conditions which increase the risk of having a low birth weight infant; programs that seek to reduce the risk of low birth weight; and research on new approaches to prevent premature labor as well as promoting the normal growth and development of a fetus. Since 1987, the Black Health Care Task Force, established by the Tennessee Department of Health and Environment has funded three infant mortality reduction pilot projects (Alton Park/Dodson Avenue Health Care in Hamilton County, Memphis Health Center and, Memphis-Shelby County Health Department) that operated in the two Tennessee counties where the Black infant mortality rates were extremely high. The projects goals were (1) to improve birth weight and survival rates of black infants born to indigent and Medicaid women; (2) to reduce maternal morbidity among indigent and Medicaid women; (3) to enhance the participation of indigent and Medicaid maternity clients in the appropriate and timely prenatal intrapartum and postpartum services; (4) to reduce the incidence of unplanned pregnancies among adolescents; and (5) to increase the utilization of family planning services by indigent and Medicaid women. Data will be reported and analyzed to assess whether or not the projects had a positive effect on birth outcome and a subsequent reduction in infant mortality. The data for this analysis is based on enrollment data provided by the projects, and linked birth and infant death certificates for project and nonproject comparisons, as retrieved from the Department of Health and Environment's Vital Records.