SEARCH_TOPIC: Postpartum depression
TITLE: Risk Factors for Postpartum Depression Based on Genetic and Epigenetic Interactions.
PMID: 37004608
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37004608/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Postpartum depression (PPD) is a serious mood disorder that tends to occur after the delivery, which may bring lifelong consequences to women and their families in terms of family relationships, social relationships, and mental health. Currently, various risk factors including environmental factors and genetic factors that may induce postpartum depression have been extensively studied. In this review, we suggest that postpartum women's susceptibility to postpartum depression may be the result of the interaction between the genes associated with postpartum depression as well as the interaction between genetic and environmental factors. We reviewed the genes that have been studied in postpartum depression, including genes related to the synthesis, metabolism, and transport of monoamine neurotransmitters, key molecules of the HPA axis, and the kynurenine pathway. These studies have found more or less gene-gene and gene-environment interactions, so we will discuss these issues in more detail. However, so far, the conclusions of these risk factors, especially genetic factors, are not completely consistent in the occurrence and exacerbation of symptoms in postpartum depression, and it is not clear how these risk factors specifically participate in the pathological mechanism of the disease and play a role. We conclude that the role of genetic polymorphisms, including genetic and epigenetic processes, in the occurrence and development of postpartum depression, is complex and ambiguous. We also note that interactions between multiple candidate genes and the environment have been suggested as causes of depression, suggesting that more definitive research is needed to understand the heritability and susceptibility of PPD. Overall, our work supports the hypothesis that postpartum depression is more likely to be caused by a combination of multiple genetic and environmental factors than by a single genetic or environmental influence.