SEARCH_TOPIC: Antibiotics classes
TITLE: MDR/XDR/PDR or DTR? Which definition best fits the resistance profile of Pseudomonas aeruginosa?
PMID: 37930070
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37930070/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The aim of this narrative review is to compare the prognostic utility of the new definition of difficult-to-treat resistance (DTR) vs. established definitions in patients with Pseudomonas aeruginosa infection to understand the therapeutic implications of resistance classification and its impact on clinical outcome. Among Gram-negative bacteria (GNB), P. aeruginosa (PA) is associated with high rates of morbidity and mortality, mostly related to its intrinsic capacity of developing antibiotic resistance. Several classifications of antibiotic resistance have been proposed in the last 15 years. The most common used is that from Magiorakos et al. including multidrug resistance (MDR), extensively drug-resistant (XDR) and pan drug resistance (PDR) according to the number of antibiotic classes showing in vitro activity. A further classification based on the resistance to specific antibiotic classes (i.e. fluoroquinolones, cephalosporins, carbapenem resistance) was also proposed. However, both of them have been criticized because of limited usefulness in clinical practice and for poor correlation with patient outcome, mainly in infections due to PA. More recently the new definition of difficult-to-treat resistance (DTR) has been proposed referring to nonsusceptibility to all first-line agents showing high-efficacy and low-toxicity (i.e. carbapenems, β-lactam-β-lactamase inhibitor combinations, and fluoroquinolones). Studies including large cohorts of patients with GNB bloodstream infections have confirmed the prognostic value of DTR classification and its clinical usefulness mainly in infections due to PA. Indeed, in the recent documents from the Infectious Diseases Society of America (IDSA) on the management of antibiotic resistant GNB infections, the DTR classification was applied to PA. DTR definition seems to identify better than MDR/XDR/PDR and single class resistant categories the cases of PA with limited treatment options. It requires periodic revision in order to remain up-to-date with the introduction of new antibiotics and the evolving pattern of resistance.