SEARCH_TOPIC: Rural healthcare
TITLE: Accessibility to Hearing Healthcare in Rural and Urban Populations of Alabama: Perspectives and A Preliminary Roadmap for Addressing Inequalities.
PMID: 33128159
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33128159/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Hearing loss is a growing public health concern and has been associated with poor cardiovascular health, diabetes, increased social isolation and poor cognitive functioning. Addressing this issue, especially in rural communities, will require increased awareness of hearing loss and its link to emotional and physical well-being. The purpose of this study was to understand the challenges that those with hearing loss living in rural and urban communities experience and to examine the feasibility of using primary care physicians to assist with improving access to hearing healthcare in rural communities. One hundred thirty-four participants were recruited from rural and urban counties in West Central and South Alabama. All participants completed a hearing evaluation and a Healthcare and Hearing Healthcare Accessibility Questionnaire. Over half of the adults in the study with hearing loss did not have access to hearing healthcare because of distance to a hearing healthcare professional. Other reasons for participants not having access to hearing healthcare included financial constraints, lack of awareness of having a hearing loss, lack of time to see a hearing healthcare provider, and not knowing how to access a provider. Results, however, revealed that most adults in the study had access to a primary care professional. The primary care provider, therefore, could be a valuable resource for the dissemination of information related to hearing healthcare. Collaborative work with primary care providers will help to develop and expand hearing healthcare awareness, research and services provided through the Here Hear Alabama project, a rural outreach initiative in West Central and South Alabama.