SEARCH_TOPIC: Antipsychotics
TITLE: Antipsychotics, Delirium, and Acute Respiratory Distress Syndrome: What Is the Link?
PMID: 29444340
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29444340/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Acute respiratory distress syndrome (ARDS) is an acute inflammatory process that impairs the ability of the lungs to oxygenate and ultimately leads to respiratory failure. Patients who develop ARDS often have prolonged and complicated hospital courses putting them at risk for intensive care unit (ICU) delirium. Patients with ICU delirium often need chemical sedation, mechanical ventilation, prolonged duration of ICU and hospital stays, and they experience long-term cognitive impairment and increased mortality. In a patient with ARDS, ICU delirium further complicates the hospital course and increases the risk of morbidity and mortality. Antipsychotics are prescribed to decrease the severity and duration of ICU delirium, thus potentially decreasing their risk of morbidity and mortality. However, antipsychotics are associated with many adverse effects including respiratory failure. Given the long-term sequelae associated with the development of ICU delirium and the risks associated with antipsychotic use, clinicians must weigh the risks and benefits of antipsychotic use. This review investigates the interrelationship between ARDS, delirium, and antipsychotic use. In addition to discussing relevant studies evaluating antipsychotics for the prevention and treatment of delirium, we investigate safety concerns with the use of antipsychotics, especially as they relate to ARDS. Using the data compiled in this review, clinicians can make an informed decision about the use of antipsychotics for the prevention or treatment of delirium, with special consideration for their patients with ARDS. Future studies are needed to critically evaluate antipsychotic timing, dose, and duration for the prevention and treatment of ICU delirium and specifically evaluate the impact in special populations, particularly patients with ARDS.