SEARCH_TOPIC: Hysterectomy
TITLE: Peripartum hysterectomy due to severe postpartum hemorrhage: A hospital-based study.
PMID: 35388907
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35388907/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
A peripartum hysterectomy is typically performed as a lifesaving procedure in obstetrics to manage severe postpartum hemorrhage. Severe hemorrhages that lead to peripartum hysterectomies are mainly caused by uterine atony and placenta accreta spectrum disorders. In this study, we aimed to estimate the incidence, risk factors, causes and management of severe postpartum hemorrhage resulting in peripartum hysterectomies, and to describe the complications of the hysterectomies. Eligible women had given birth at gestational week 23+0 or later and had a postpartum hemorrhage ≥1500 mL or a blood transfusion, due to postpartum hemorrhage, at Oslo University Hospital, Norway, between 2008 and 2017. Among the eligible women, this study included those who underwent a hysterectomy within the first 42 days after delivery. The Norwegian Medical Birth Registry provided the reference group. We used Poisson regression to estimate adjusted incidence rate ratios with 95% confidence intervals to identify clinical factors associated with peripartum hysterectomy. The incidence of hysterectomies with severe postpartum hemorrhage was 0.44/1000 deliveries (42/96313). Among the women with severe postpartum hemorrhage, 1.6% ended up with a hysterectomy (42/2621). Maternal age ≥40, previous cesarean section, multiple pregnancy and placenta previa were associated with a significantly higher risk of hysterectomy. Placenta accreta spectrum disorders were the most frequent cause of hemorrhage that resulted in a hysterectomy (52%, 22/42) and contributed to most of the complications following the hysterectomy (11/15 women with complications). The rate of peripartum hysterectomies at Oslo University Hospital was low, but was higher than previously reported from Norway. Risk factors included high maternal age, previous cesarean section, multiple pregnancy and placenta previa, well known risk factors for placenta accreta spectrum disorders and severe postpartum hemorrhage. Placenta accreta spectrum disorders were the largest contributor to hysterectomies and complications.