SEARCH_TOPIC: Vegetarian diet
TITLE: The impact of a vegetarian diet on chronic kidney disease (CKD) progression - a systematic review.
PMID: 37308813
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37308813/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
A vegetarian diet is a popular alternative to the casual diet - it is considered healthy, and was proven to positively affect cardiovascular health. The Chronic Kidney Disease (CKD) progression is a major issue in the healthcare system, and constitutes a leading cause of death for 1.5% of the global population. The objective of this systematic review was to investigate the potential impact of a vegetarian diet on kidney function in CKD patients. Our systematic review focused on randomized controlled trials (RCTs) which compared the effects of a vegetarian diet (experimental) and a standard omnivore diet (comparator) in terms of the estimated glomerular filtration rate (eGFR) in CKD patients. Inclusion criteria were based on PICO elements, with two researchers involved in browsing the Cochrane and Pubmed search engines. The investigation was performed using the PRISMA 2020 Checklist and PRISMA 2020 flow diagram. The search terms included: 'vegetarian diet' AND 'nephropathy', 'eGFR', 'albuminuria', 'chronic kidney disease'. Bias assessment was performed using RoB 2 tool to determine the validity of the data collected from studies. Four RCTs with a total of 346 participants were included in the presented systematic review. Two largest RCTs reported an increase in eGFR following a change to a vegetarian diet (p = 0.01 and p = 0.001). Another two found no significant differences between the experimental and control groups, also these trials were associated with a high risk of bias in terms of missing data outcome and the randomization process. The findings collected in this systematic review suggest that a vegetarian diet improves renal filtration function in CKD patients. Therefore, it seems essential to conduct further research involving the impact of the diet on the progression of CKD.