SEARCH_TOPIC: Inflammation mechanism
TITLE: Inhibition of inflammation by berberine: Molecular mechanism and network pharmacology analysis.
PMID: 38522318
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38522318/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Traditional Chinese Medicine (TCM), renowned for its holistic approach with a 2000-year history of utilizing natural remedies, offers unique advantages in disease prevention and treatment. Berberine, found in various Chinese herbs, has been employed for many years, primarily for addressing conditions such as diarrhea and dysentery. Berberine has recently become a research focus owing to its pharmacological activities and benefits to human bodies. However, little is known about the anti-inflammatory mechanism of berberine. To summarize recent findings regarding the pharmacological effects and mechanisms of berberine anti-inflammation and highlight and predict the potential therapeutic effects and systematic mechanism of berberine. Recent studies (2013-2023) on the pharmacological effects and mechanisms of berberine anti-inflammation were retrieved from Web of Science, PubMed, Google Scholar, and Scopus up to July 2023 using relevant keywords. Network pharmacology and bioinformatics analysis were employed to predict the therapeutic effects and mechanisms of berberine against potential diseases. The related pharmacological mechanisms of berberine anti-inflammation include the inhibition of inflammatory cytokine production (e.g., IL-1β, IL-6, TNF-α), thereby attenuating the inflammatory response; Inhibiting the activation of NF-κB signaling pathway and IκBα degradation; Inhibiting the activation of MAPK signaling pathway; Enhancing the activation of the STAT1 signaling pathway; Berberine interacts directly with cell membranes through a variety of pathways, thereby influencing cellular physiological activities. Berberine enhances human immunity and modulates immune system function, which is integral to addressing certain autoimmune and tumour-related health concerns. This study expounds on the correlation between berberine and inflammatory diseases, encapsulating the mechanisms through which berberine treats select typical inflammatory ailments. Furthermore, it delves into a deeper understanding of berberine's effectiveness by integrating network pharmacology and molecular docking techniques in the context of treating inflammatory diseases. It provides guidance and reference for berberine's subsequent revelation of the modern scientific connotation of Chinese medicine.