SEARCH_TOPIC: Skeletal system
TITLE: The Addition of Hand-specific Skeletal Maturity Parameters Does Not Improve Skeletal Maturity Estimation Accuracy of the Modified Fels Wrist System.
PMID: 38270347
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38270347/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The Modified Fels Wrist system is potentially the most accurate clinically accessible skeletal maturity system utilizing hand or wrist radiographs. During development, parameters distal to the metacarpals were excluded. We attempted to further optimize the Modified Fels wrist system through the inclusion of hand parameters distal to the metacarpals. Forty-three new anteroposterior (AP) hand radiographic parameters were identified from the Fels and Greulich and Pyle (GP) skeletal maturity systems. Twelve parameters were eliminated from further evaluation for poor correlation with skeletal maturity, poor reliability, and lack of relevance in the peripubertal years. In addition to the 8 previously described Modified Fels Wrist parameters, 31 hand radiographic parameters were evaluated on serial peripubertal AP hand radiographs to identify the ones most important for accurately estimating skeletal age. This process produced a "Modified Fels hand-wrist" model; its performance was compared with (1) GP only; (2) Sanders Hand (SH) only; (3) age, sex, and GP; (4) age, sex, and SH; and (5) Modified Fels Wrist system. Three hundred seventy-two radiographs from 42 girls and 38 boys were included. Of the 39 radiographic parameters that underwent full evaluation, 9 remained in the combined Modified Fels Hand-Wrist system in addition to chronological age and sex. Four parameters are wrist specific, and the remaining 5 are hand specific. The Hand-Wrist system outperformed both GP and SH in estimating skeletal maturity ( P <0.001). When compared with the Modified Fels Wrist system, the Modified Fels Hand-Wrist system performed similarly regarding skeletal maturity estimation (0.36±0.32 vs. 0.34±0.26, P =0.59) but had an increased (worse) rate of outlier predictions >1 year discrepant from true skeletal maturity (4.9% vs. 1.9%, P =0.01). The addition of hand parameters to the existing Modified Fels Wrist system did not improve skeletal maturity estimation accuracy and worsened the rate of outlier estimations. When an AP hand-wrist radiograph is available, the existing Modified Fels wrist system is best for skeletal maturity estimation. Level III.