SEARCH_TOPIC: IUD
TITLE: Why intrauterine device (IUD) utilization is low in southwestern Ethiopia. A mixed-method study.
PMID: 37306052
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37306052/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
An intrauterine device (IUD) is a highly effective long-acting and reversible contraceptive method widely available around the world. However, only a small proportion of women in developing countries, including Ethiopia, are currently using the method. Therefore, this study aimed to identify why IUD utilization is low in southwestern Ethiopia. A mixed-method study involving health facilities and communities was conducted. The focus group discussions and key informant interviewees for the qualitative study were selected purposively, whereas 844 women family planning users were selected using systematic random sampling from November 1-30, 2020. Quantitative data was collected using Open Data Kit and analyzed using Stata version 16.0. Multivariable logistic regression analyses were done to identify significant factors influencing IUD use. The qualitative data were tape-recorded, transcribed, and finally, thematic analyses were done. A total of 784 participants were involved in the study yielding a response rate of 92.9%. Among all respondents, only 1.3%, 2.4%, and 30.0% had been using an IUD, preferred an IUD, and had the intention to use an IUD, respectively. The main reported barriers to use an IUD among qualitative participants were fear of side-effects, religious prohibitions of contraception use, husband disapproval, lack of training by health workers, misconceptions, and longer duration of use. IUD information (AOR = 2.19 [CI: 1.56-3.08]), and rich wealth status (AOR = 1.70 [CI: 1.13-2.56]) were associated with the intention to continue or start to use an IUD. IUD use and information on IUDs in the study area was very low. Information about IUDs, wealth status, and partner disapproval were determinant factors for intention to use an IUD. Thus, a regular awareness creation program using accessible media platforms by the government and stakeholders on IUD use is necessary to provide reliable information to the community and resolve misconceptions. In addition, women's empowerment to balance partner dominance on decision-making of contraception use and health care worker training on long-acting reversible contraceptives (LARCs) to increase access to LARC services are necessary to increase uptake of LARCs in general and of IUDs, in particular in the study regions.