SEARCH_TOPIC: Bypass surgery
TITLE: Serum S-100 beta protein during coronary artery bypass graft surgery with or without cardiopulmonary bypass.
PMID: 16181873
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/16181873/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Brain damage is a serious complication of cardiac anesthesia. The purpose of this study was to detect brain damage at different surgical stages during coronary artery bypass graft with or without cardiopulmonary bypass. We conducted a prospective, longitudinal study to evaluate serum S-100 beta protein, an early marker of brain injury, in patients electively undergoing off-pump (n = 30) or traditional coronary artery bypass graft (n = 60). Blood was sampled immediately before anesthesia, before and after cardiopulmonary bypass, and on the day after surgery. Serum S-100 beta protein was lowest immediately before induction of anesthesia and significantly increased before and after cardiopulmonary bypass, then declined by the first postoperative day in both groups. Peak values were highest in the traditional group directly after coronary artery bypass graft. On the day after surgery, S-100 beta protein levels were similar between groups, but were higher than baseline within each group. Significant increase in serum S-100 beta protein was also observed even before cardiopulmonary bypass in cardiopulmonary bypass patients, or before manipulation of the heart and aorta in off-pump patients. These reflect the possibility that brain damage may occur before major manipulation (cardiopulmonary bypass or manipulating heart and aorta). Moreover, S-100 beta levels did not return to normal on the day after the operation. This prospective study has shown that serum S-100 beta protein was not only higher than baseline both after cardiopulmonary bypass and on the day after surgery in both groups of patients but it was also significantly increased before cardiopulmonary bypass or manipulation of the heart or aorta. These findings may have implications for anesthesiologic care during the total course of cardiac surgery.