SEARCH_TOPIC: Syphilis
TITLE: Ocular syphilis.
PMID: 33831337
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33831337/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Syphilis is a sexually transmitted, systemic, inflammatory disease caused by the spirochaete, <i>Treponema pallidum</i>. The natural history of untreated syphilis progresses through four distinct stages: primary, secondary, latent, and tertiary syphilis. Ocular involvement can occur at any stage of syphilis and any part of the eye can be affected. With the exception of syphilitic posterior placoid chorioretinitis, the diverse manifestations of ocular syphilis have few distinct features that can be used to assist in clinical diagnosis. Therefore, ocular syphilis should always be a part of the differential diagnosis of most, if not all, ocular infectious and inflammatory presentations. Specifically, uveitis presentations, high-risk sexual history, illicit drug use history, treatment failure, prior history of syphilis should prompt further diagnostic workup for ocular syphilis. A presumptive diagnosis of ocular syphilis relies on serological testing, both treponemal and nontreponemal tests. All patients with ocular syphilis should have their cerebrospinal fluids tested for the co-existence of neurosyphilis and their blood tested for human immunodeficiency virus co-infection. In the United States, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention recommend that ocular syphilis be managed according to its treatment guidelines for neurosyphilis, with parenteral aqueous crystalline penicillin G the drug of choice. With the timely diagnosis and appropriate treatment, ocular syphilis is curable. However, delayed diagnosis of ocular syphilis may result in long-term visual impairment. Delayed diagnosis occurs because of its diverse presentations mimicking other ocular diseases, and failure of the clinician to order serological testing. With the recent worldwide resurgence of ocular syphilis, clinicians should be familiar with the manifestation, diagnosis, and treatment of ocular syphilis.