SEARCH_TOPIC: Probiotics and gut health
TITLE: Aberrant gut microbiota alters host metabolome and impacts renal failure in humans and rodents.
PMID: 32241904
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32241904/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Patients with renal failure suffer from symptoms caused by uraemic toxins, possibly of gut microbial origin, as deduced from studies in animals. The aim of the study is to characterise relationships between the intestinal microbiome composition, uraemic toxins and renal failure symptoms in human end-stage renal disease (ESRD). Characterisation of gut microbiome, serum and faecal metabolome and human phenotypes in a cohort of 223 patients with ESRD and 69 healthy controls. Multidimensional data integration to reveal links between these datasets and the use of chronic kidney disease (CKD) rodent models to test the effects of intestinal microbiome on toxin accumulation and disease severity. A group of microbial species enriched in ESRD correlates tightly to patient clinical variables and encode functions involved in toxin and secondary bile acids synthesis; the relative abundance of the microbial functions correlates with the serum or faecal concentrations of these metabolites. Microbiota from patients transplanted to renal injured germ-free mice or antibiotic-treated rats induce higher production of serum uraemic toxins and aggravated renal fibrosis and oxidative stress more than microbiota from controls. Two of the species, <i>Eggerthella lenta</i> and <i>Fusobacterium nucleatum</i>, increase uraemic toxins production and promote renal disease development in a CKD rat model. A probiotic <i>Bifidobacterium animalis</i> decreases abundance of these species, reduces levels of toxins and the severity of the disease in rats. Aberrant gut microbiota in patients with ESRD sculpts a detrimental metabolome aggravating clinical outcomes, suggesting that the gut microbiota will be a promising target for diminishing uraemic toxicity in those patients. This study was registered at ClinicalTrials.gov (NCT03010696).