SEARCH_TOPIC: Chronic disease management
TITLE: The implementation of a chronic disease management program (Prolanis) in Indonesia: a literature review.
PMID: 31860469
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31860469/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Background The Chronic Disease Management Program or Program Pengelolaan Penyakit Kronis (Prolanis) is a program initiated by the Social Insurance Administration Organization or Badan Penyelenggara Jaminan Social (BPJS) in Indonesia. Prolanis aim to provide a proactive healthcare service approach for patients with chronic diseases particularly those with diabetes mellitus and hypertension. Prolanis also aims to achieve the optimal quality of life in patients with chronic disease through effective and efficient healthcare services including cost. All primary healthcare centers and a few of the private clinics in Indonesia have implemented Prolanis, however, the impact of the program has not been reviewed. This review aimed to see the implementation of Prolanis in healthcare facilities in Indonesia. Methods A literature review was conducted by searching articles through Google Scholar and PubMed databases up to August 2019. The following keywords or terms were used: Prolanis, BPJS indexed with terms related to blood pressure or hypertension in Indonesia. The references, citations and similar articles from the identified articles were used to identify additional sources. Results Twenty-four articles were identified through the first search using the key terms although only eight articles met the inclusion criteria. This review showed that the implementation of Prolanis in the healthcare facilities in Indonesia was varied in terms of the activities and services provided. The healthcare professional involved in the implementation of Prolanis were also varied. There were some barriers faced by the healthcare facilities including the availability of funding, the healthcare facilities and infrastructures, the unavailability of standard operating orocedures (SOPs) as well as the limitation of human resources involved in Prolanis. Conclusions The implementation of Prolanis in Indonesia has not been optimized, as there were some barriers during its implementation in the healthcare facilities.