SEARCH_TOPIC: Bypass surgery
TITLE: Establishing robotic bariatric surgery at an academic tertiary hospital: a learning curve analysis for totally robotic Roux-en-Y gastric bypass.
PMID: 35994194
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35994194/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The use of robotic systems in bariatric surgery has constantly increased over the last years. However, beside its technical advantages in morbidly obese patients the conclusive role of robotics in bariatric and metabolic surgery is still under controversial debate. This is an analysis of prospectively collected data of consecutive patients undergoing fully robotic Roux-en-Y gastric bypasses (TR-RYGB) during the first year after implementation of a robotic bariatric program at a tertiary university hospital. All patients were operated by a previously untrained robotic but experienced laparoscopic bariatric surgeon using the daVinci Xi system (Intuitive Surgical, Sarl). Data recording included patient characteristics, operative and functional outcomes, complications and learning curves for surgeon and assistants. In total, 80 patients underwent primary or revisional robotic bariatric surgery. Seventy-two patients (90%) received a TR-RYGB. There were no major complications, re-interventions or readmissions. The overall complication rate was 2.5% (Clavien-Dindo grade I and II). The overall operation time was 140.7 ± 24.6 min and decreased significantly from the first to the last decade of procedures (procedure 1-10: 171.2 ± 26.3 min versus procedure 63-72: 116.0 ± 10.9 min, p < 0.0001). A stabilization of the learning curve was observed after 30 procedures for the surgeon and after five procedures for the bedside assistant. With immediate effect, TR-RYGB is a safe procedure with low complication rates for an experienced laparoscopic bariatric surgeon without prior robotic skills. Learning curves are steep and operation times can be effectively decreased by increasing the experience of the surgeon.