SEARCH_TOPIC: Vitamins and minerals
TITLE: The role of vitamins and nutrients in rosacea.
PMID: 38695936
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38695936/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Rosacea is a common inflammatory skin condition displaying symptoms like flushing, erythema, papules, and pustules. Oral antibiotics, despite long-term adverse effects, are often used due to topical treatment limitations, underscoring the need for cost-effective choices like dietary modifications. Our review investigates the role of vitamins and minerals in rosacea, and provides evidence-based recommendations for supplementation and topical treatment of these nutrients for rosacea. An online search was performed on PubMed, Web of Science, Science Direct, Google Scholar, and ClinicalTrials.gov from 1998 to 2023. Included studies were summarized and assessed for quality and relevance in rosacea management. Varied outcomes emerged concerning the impact of essential vitamins and minerals on rosacea treatment. Vitamin A derivatives, specifically oral isotretinoin, demonstrated significant efficacy, with a 90% reduction in lesions, complete remission in 24% of patients, and marked improvement in 57% of patients. Vitamin B3 derivatives, such as topical 1-methylnicotinamide 0.25% and NADH 1%, improved symptoms in 76.4% (26/34) and 80% of patients, respectively. Outcomes for vitamin D, vitamin C, and zinc supplementation varied across studies. However, zinc sulfate solution 5% significantly reduced acne rosacea severity for patients with 40% and 60% exhibiting a moderate or good response, respectively. Omega-3 fatty acids showed significant improvement in alleviating xerophthalmia in 64% of patients with ocular rosacea. Vitamins and minerals hold potential in managing rosacea symptoms, offering a safe and cost-effective alternative or adjunctive treatment option. Currently, there are no established recommendations regarding their supplementation for rosacea. Studies assessing serum levels of vitamins and minerals in relation to rosacea are warranted, as this avenue holds potential for future advancements in the field.