SEARCH_TOPIC: Digital detox
TITLE: A Literature Review on Holistic Well-Being and Dopamine Fasting: An Integrated Approach.
PMID: 38966464
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38966464/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Popularly known as dopaminergic detox or dopamine fasting, it is a concept that aims at reducing dependence on instant satisfaction gratification and overstimulation to attain mental clarity, lessen anxiety, and be able to enjoy everyday events again. Digital detox has been a part of the dopamine fasting concept for several years now. However, some critics argue that this notion has no scientific proof behind it and may fail to deal with the problem of dopamine dysregulation. Some intense types of dopamine fasting which include extreme isolation or strict dieting can result in damage to mental health as well as physical fitness. The objective of the article is to understand what dopamine fasting means and see the literature and evidence available on the topic. Indexes like PubMed, Scopus, OVID, Embase, and Google Scholar were searched using the keywords to understand the existing knowledge about dopamine fasting. The literature review was then written to incorporate the understanding in a way that can be implemented practically. Recent studies have shown that individuals who engage in dopamine-fasting-like ideologies may experience reduced impulsive behaviors, increased focus on tasks, and reduced overwhelm. However, extreme forms of dopamine fasting can lead to feelings of loneliness, anxiety, and malnutrition, which can have detrimental effects on mental and physical health. Hence, the effects of dopamine fasting can vary greatly among individuals, and there is no one-size-fits-all approach. It is essential to consider individual needs and preferences when incorporating dopamine fasting into one's lifestyle and explore alternative practices that align with the principles of dopamine fasting. Understanding and respecting these differences is crucial in determining the most suitable strategies for maintaining a balanced dopamine response and overall psychological health. The benefits of dopamine fasting can be tremendous if done correctly but it depends on every individual to find the correct way and in the modern day, the practices can become tough to implement.