SEARCH_TOPIC: Seasonal affective disorder
TITLE: Treatment measures for seasonal affective disorder: A network meta-analysis.
PMID: 38220102
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38220102/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The purpose of this study was to assess the potential effectiveness of several mainstream therapies, including phototherapy, antidepressants, cognitive-behavioral therapy, and negative ion generators, in the treatment of Seasonal Affective Disorder (SAD). A systematic search of PubMed, Embase, Cochrane, and WOS databases was conducted from January 1975 to December 3, 2022. Randomized controlled trials meeting predefined selection criteria for the treatment of SAD using mainstream therapeutic approaches were identified. After reviewing abstracts, data were synthesized and categorized based on the type of intervention and the targeted disorder. A total of 21 randomized controlled trials, involving 1037 participants, were included. The standardized mean difference of depression scores and corresponding 95 % confidence intervals were calculated to assess the efficacy of phototherapy for Seasonal Affective Disorder. The meta-analysis revealed that phototherapy was significantly more effective than other intervention groups or control therapies, with an effect size of 4.64(2.38,7.03). Subgroup analysis demonstrated that no factors could explain the significant heterogeneity observed. Phototherapy exhibited statistically significant mild to moderate therapeutic effects in alleviating depressive symptoms and can be considered as a clinical therapy for treating Seasonal Affective Disorder. However, the quality of evidence remains low, and further well-designed, larger sample size, and high-quality studies are needed to confirm the efficacy of phototherapy in treating Seasonal Affective Disorder. In conclusion, our systematic review and meta-analysis indicate that bright light therapy is a promising first-line non-pharmacological treatment for Seasonal Affective Disorder (SAD), showing significant improvement in mood symptoms compared to placebo. The findings support the use of bright light therapy as an effective and well-tolerated intervention for SAD. However, further large-scale, multicenter randomized controlled trials with long-term follow-up are needed to assess the long-term efficacy and safety of different treatment approaches for SAD.