SEARCH_TOPIC: Amniocentesis
TITLE: 5-Year review on amniocentesis and its maternal fetal complications.
PMID: 31539354
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31539354/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Background Amniocentesis is a well-known invasive procedure which is commonly carried out in the second trimester. The indication for amniocentesis varies throughout countries and centers. Despite providing significant prenatal diagnosis; many maternal and fetal complications have been reported from previous studies. Materials and methods This retrospective study aimed to determine the maternal and fetal complications following amniocentesis. This study involved all patients who underwent amniocentesis from January 2012 until June 2017 in a tertiary centre. Maternal age, parity, premorbid medical conditions, amniocentesis indications, gestational age during amniocentesis, karyotyping results, complications during and post procedure and the fetal outcomes were reviewed and analyzed. Results One hundred and fourteen patients' medical records were reviewed and the majority of patients (50.9%) ranged in age from age 30 to 39 years old with mean age of 34.29 years. Amniocentesis was performed during the second trimester in the majority of patients (71.1%). The indications for amniocentesis in this study were polyhydramnios (7.9%), advanced maternal age (9.6%), risk of Down's syndrome (31.6%), increased risk of Patau syndrome (6.1%), increased risk of Edward's syndrome (4.4%) and abnormal fetal ultrasonography (70.2%). Cytogenetics results of amniocentesis were normal in 82 patients (71.9%). The majority of patients (86.0%) had no complications. Two patients (12.5%) had intrauterine death presumed to be procedural related. Conclusion This 5-year retrospective study on amniocentesis procedure showed that the majority of amniocentesis were safe as 86.0% of the patients were free from any complications. Anticipating its complication is important as there is always a risk even though it is a safe procedure in general.