SEARCH_TOPIC: Cognitive rehabilitation
TITLE: Cognitive Rehabilitation for Patients with Schizophrenia: A Narrative Review of Moderating Factors, Strategies, and Outcomes.
PMID: 37525044
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37525044/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Antipsychotic drugs constitute the basis of schizophrenia therapy; however, available pharmaceutical agents lack efficacy for treating the cognitive deficits caused by the illness. The aim of the present work is to present current data regarding cognitive rehabilitation of schizophrenia, providing information and guidance to health professionals. A literature search was conducted in the PubMed and Google Scholar Databases from inception up to 1/9/2022. Relevant articles were explored for factors affecting cognitive function, including genetics, psychopathology, time in the course of the illness, and drug therapy. Characteristics and outcome of cognitive rehabilitation programs are briefly presented. A total of 562 relevant articles were retrieved, 39 of which were selected for the review. Factors contributing to a favorable outcome are young age, early phase of disease, symptomatic control of hostility and conceptual disorganization, lack of negative symptoms, management of drug side effects, and cognitive and cortical reserve. Some evidence for a procognitive effect seems to exist for atypical antipsychotics, clozapine, aripiprazole, memantine, modafinil, d-serine, and cycloserine. The Val/Val polymorphism of the COMT gene seems to be associated with worse outcome. Specific remediation strategies include programs such as Cognitive Enhancement Therapy (CET), Cognitive Adaptation Training (CAT), and RehaCom Cognitive Therapy Software, among others, all employing a range of techniques, from paper-and-pencil to computer-assisted, bottom-up, or top-down approaches, and varying neurocognitive targets. Cognitive symptoms, closely related to functional impairment, still remain a therapeutic challenge. Cognitive rehabilitation strategies are as yet the only treatment modality offering cognitive improvement to patients who struggle to recover.