SEARCH_TOPIC: Carbohydrates types
TITLE: Triennial Growth Symposium: effects of polymeric carbohydrates on growth and development in pigs.
PMID: 21278117
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/21278117/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Polymeric carbohydrates, starch and nonstarch polysaccharides (NSP), quantitatively represent the largest portion of the diets for pigs and are, therefore, the largest energy contributor. The 2 types of polysaccharides, however, have different fates and functions in the gastrointestinal tract and lead to different metabolites upon digestion. Pancreatic and mucosal enzymes in the small intestine break down the majority of starch, whereas NSP primarily are degraded by the microflora in the large intestine. Starch degradation leads to the release of glucose, which is absorbed by an active absorption process that triggers the release of insulin from the pancreas, whereas the fermentation of NSP to short-chain fatty acids (SCFA; i.e., acetate, propionate, and butyrate) occurs at a slower and more constant rate and with SCFA being absorbed by passive diffusion. Type and amounts of polymeric carbohydrates influence growth and development through different mechanisms. First, the proportion of starch to NSP plays an important role for the content of available energy (i.e., DE, ME, and NE); available energy relative to protein is crucial for performance and carcass quality. Second, the proportion of starch to NSP will influence rate and type of metabolites (i.e., glucose vs. SCFA) deriving from carbohydrate assimilation. Third and finally, the type of starch (i.e., types A, B, and C) and soluble NSP will influence the release of insulin, the hormone that facilitates nutrient uptake by tissues, organs, and cells, and thus plays a critically essential role in protein synthesis and muscle growth, as well as lipid synthesis and adipose tissue growth. In conclusion, polymeric carbohydrates influence growth and development through events in the gut and direct and indirect effects of different metabolites deriving from carbohydrate assimilation.