SEARCH_TOPIC: Bypass surgery
TITLE: Perioperative safety of simultaneous off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting with non-cardiac surgery of moderate-to-severe severity.
PMID: 32976242
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32976242/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
To evaluate the perioperative safety of simultaneous off-pump coronary artery bypass grafting (OPCABG) with non-cardiac surgery. From September 2013 to January 2019, patients who underwent OPCABG surgery in the Department of Cardiology, Peking University First Hospital were included in this retrospective study. A total of 54 patients who underwent simultaneous surgery were defined as simultaneous surgery group. A total of 108 patients who had recently undergone isolated OPCABG surgery, and had similar vascular reconstruction methods were selected for matching, and these patients were defined as the OPCABG group. The general data and laboratory indicators were detected and were used as baseline data, and the EuroSCORE II scoring system was used to evaluate the surgical risk of patients based on these data. During surgery, intraoperative indicators were assessed and evaluated during surgery. In addition, evaluation of postoperative indicators was performed, including mechanical ventilation time, residence time in ICU, and proportion of perioperative myocardial infarction, perioperative stroke, postoperative renal failure, and surgical wound infection. All the combined non-cardiac surgeries were assessed to be of moderate-to-severe grade by operative severity scoring system. The analysis of intraoperative indicators showed that there were no significant differences in proportion of emergency or urgent surgery, cases of arterial and venous anastomosis, and proportion of intraoperative blood transfusion between two groups (P > 0.05). Meanwhile, the values of operation time and intraoperative blood loss of patients in simultaneous surgery group were significantly higher than that in OPCABG group (P < 0.05). No perioperative death events occurred in this study. In terms of postoperative indicators, the values of operation duration and intraoperative blood loss of patients in simultaneous surgery group were significantly higher than that in OPCABG group (P < 0.05). Simultaneous OPCABG surgery with non-cardiac surgeries of moderate-to-severe severity may not be associated with increased postoperative risks when compared with isolated OPCABG.