SEARCH_TOPIC: Sugar consumption
TITLE: Current trends of sugar consumption in developing societies.
PMID: 9429817
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/9429817/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
This paper reviews recent data on sugar consumption in developing countries that may lead to a potential increase in caries prevalence. A search of the business, dental and nutritional literature was conducted through May 1995. There is evidence that sugar (sucrose) use was increasing in China, India, and Southeast Asia. In South and Central America (except Haiti) sugar use was either equivalent to or higher than that in most developed societies. In the Middle East, average sugar use was higher than that of other developing areas. However, it was either lower than or equivalent to the levels reported by other developed countries. Many central African countries consumed less than 15 kg of sugar/ person/year. Of particular concern is a rise in the consumption of sugar-containing carbonated beverages in a number of developing societies: China, India, Vietnam, Thailand, and other Southeast Asian countries are currently major growth markets for the soft drink industry. Consumption of high-sugar desserts and snacks may also be increasing in urban centers in some developing countries. To counteract the potential increase in the prevalence of dental caries in some developing countries, preventive and oral health promotion programs should be planned and implemented. We contend that taxation of sugar-containing products as well as efforts to reduce the level of sugar consumption to "safe" levels may be impractical, and in most countries, cannot be supported for political, economic, or health reasons. Instead, we recommend that collaboration be established between public health authorities and manufacturers/distributors of soft drinks and sweets in developing countries to establish a dental health fund that could be used to support caries preventive programs. The fund could be supported through donations from manufacturers based on the principle of the "milli-cent" (1 cent for every 1000 cents of sales). This minimal contribution would provide enough financial support for planning and implementing dental preventive and restorative programs in developing countries.