SEARCH_TOPIC: Human brain structure
TITLE: Human Brain In Vitro Model for Pathogen Infection-Related Neurodegeneration Study.
PMID: 38928228
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38928228/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Recent advancements in stem cell biology and tissue engineering have revolutionized the field of neurodegeneration research by enabling the development of sophisticated in vitro human brain models. These models, including 2D monolayer cultures, 3D organoids, organ-on-chips, and bioengineered 3D tissue models, aim to recapitulate the cellular diversity, structural organization, and functional properties of the native human brain. This review highlights how these in vitro brain models have been used to investigate the effects of various pathogens, including viruses, bacteria, fungi, and parasites infection, particularly in the human brain cand their subsequent impacts on neurodegenerative diseases. Traditional studies have demonstrated the susceptibility of different 2D brain cell types to infection, elucidated the mechanisms underlying pathogen-induced neuroinflammation, and identified potential therapeutic targets. Therefore, current methodological improvement brought the technology of 3D models to overcome the challenges of 2D cells, such as the limited cellular diversity, incomplete microenvironment, and lack of morphological structures by highlighting the need for further technological advancements. This review underscored the significance of in vitro human brain cell from 2D monolayer to bioengineered 3D tissue model for elucidating the intricate dynamics for pathogen infection modeling. These in vitro human brain cell enabled researchers to unravel human specific mechanisms underlying various pathogen infections such as SARS-CoV-2 to alter blood-brain-barrier function and <i>Toxoplasma gondii</i> impacting neural cell morphology and its function. Ultimately, these in vitro human brain models hold promise as personalized platforms for development of drug compound, gene therapy, and vaccine. Overall, we discussed the recent progress in in vitro human brain models, their applications in studying pathogen infection-related neurodegeneration, and future directions.