SEARCH_TOPIC: Posture correction
TITLE: Evidence-Based Corrective Exercise Intervention for Forward Head Posture in Adolescents and Young Adults Without Musculoskeletal Pathology: A Critically Appraised Topic.
PMID: 35172275
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35172275/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Habitual overuse of cellphones is on the rise among adolescents and young adults. Those who maintain a flexed neck posture when using a cellphone for extended periods possess an elevated risk for developing forward head posture (FHP). Chronic FHP can lead to painful medical disorders affecting the head, neck, and shoulders. Both stretching and strengthening exercises are advocated interventions to address this postural abnormality; however, due to a wide range of corrective exercise programming in the literature, the decision for which exercises to prescribe for this condition can be challenging for clinicians. For adolescents and young adults without musculoskeletal pathology, what are the most frequent stretching and strengthening exercises incorporated into effective FHP intervention programs supported by current randomized control trials? A combined total of 5 stretches and 8 strengthening exercises were identified across 3 studies of level 1b evidence that successfully impacted FHP using a combined stretching and strengthening corrective exercise intervention. The supine chin tuck and a sternocleidomastoid stretch were utilized in all 3 studies, while scapular retraction and a pectoralis stretch were included in 2 of the 3 studies. Based on the results of this appraisal, the most frequent stretches and strengthening exercises incorporated into effective FHP intervention programs supported by current randomized control trials focused on adolescents or young adults without musculoskeletal pathology include a sternocleidomastoid stretch, pectoralis stretch, the supine chin tuck, and scapular retraction. There is "Good" to "Excellent" evidence from 3 level 1b randomized control trials to support the inclusion of a sternocleidomastoid stretch, pectoralis stretch, the supine chin tuck, and scapular retraction exercises into a corrective exercise program to address forward head posture.