SEARCH_TOPIC: Calcium requirements
TITLE: Digestibility of calcium in calcium-containing ingredients and requirements for digestible calcium by growing pigs.
PMID: 37758207
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37758207/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The concentration of Ca in plant feed ingredients is low compared with the requirement for pigs and most Ca in diets for pigs is provided by limestone and Ca phosphate. To determine digestibility values for Ca that are additive in mixed diets, the standardized total tract digestibility (STTD) of Ca needs to be calculated, and the STTD of Ca by growing pigs in most Ca-containing ingredients has been reported. Although Ca is an inexpensive nutrient compared with P and amino acids, excess Ca needs to be avoided because excess dietary Ca results in reduced P digestibility, reduced feed intake, and reduced growth performance of pigs. Recent data indicate that most diets produced for pigs in the United States and Europe contain ~0.20 percentage units more Ca than formulated, which likely is because of the use of limestone as a carrier in feed additives or as a flow agent in other ingredients. An excess of this magnitude without a corresponding excess of P will result in a reduction in daily gain of growing pigs by 50 to 100 g. Greater emphasis, therefore, needs to be placed on determining the concentration of Ca in diets for pigs. Microbial phytase increases the digestibility of both Ca and P and it is, therefore, important that the release of both Ca and P by phytase is considered in diet formulation. However, due to the relationship between Ca and P in postabsorptive metabolism, diets need to be formulated based on a ratio between digestible Ca and digestible P. To maximize average daily gain, this ratio needs to be less than 1.40:1.0 in diets for weanling pigs, and the ratio needs to be reduced as the body weight of pigs increases. In contrast, to maximize bone ash, the digestible Ca to digestible P ratio needs to increase from 1.67:1.0 in 11 to 25 kg pigs to 2.33:1.0 in finishing pigs. Gestating sows have reduced STTD and retention of Ca and P compared with growing pigs and formulation of diets for sows based on digestibility values obtained in growing pigs will result in inaccuracies in the provision of Ca and P. There is, however, a lack of data for the digestibility of Ca and P by gestating and lactating sows, and responses to microbial phytase by sows are not fully understood. There is, therefore, a need for research to generate more data in this area. In the present review, a summary of data for the digestibility of Ca in feed ingredients for pigs and estimates for the requirement for digestible Ca by growing and finishing pigs are provided.