SEARCH_TOPIC: Health insurance systems
TITLE: Germany: Health System Review.
PMID: 34232120
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34232120/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
This analysis of the German health system reviews recent developments in organization and governance, health financing, health care provision, health reforms and health system performance. Germany's health care system is often regarded as one of the best health care systems in the world, offering its population universal health insurance coverage and a comprehensive benefits basket with comparably low cost-sharing requirements. It provides good access to care with free choice of provider and short waiting times, which is partly due to good infrastructure with a dense network of ambulatory care physicians and hospitals, and a quantitatively high level of service provision. With the largest economy in the EU it is not surprising that Germany spends more than other countries on health, with most financing coming from public funds. The country had the highest per capita spending in the EU in 2018. In relation to overall health expenditure and available resources, a very high number of services is provided across sectors, particularly in hospital and ambulatory care. This can be seen as achieving a considerable level of technical efficiency. Given the high volumes, however, there are questions about the oversupply of services, as well as some comparatively moderate health and quality outcomes; from this perspective, there are signs that there is room for improvement in how the system allocates resources. Additional challenges in the German health system may be identified in: (1) the strong separation of ambulatory and inpatient care in terms of organization and payment, which can hinder the coordination and continuity of patient treatment; (2) the coexistence of statutory health insurance (SHI) and substitutive private health insurance (PHI), which weakens the principle of solidarity; and (3) a complex stewardship framework which promotes incrementalism and makes it more difficult to implement reforms.