SEARCH_TOPIC: Hypotension
TITLE: Management of Supine Hypertension Complicating Neurogenic Orthostatic Hypotension.
PMID: 28702747
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/28702747/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Neurogenic orthostatic hypotension (NOH) can be present in a number of disorders, including synucleinopathies, autoimmune disorders, and various genetic disorders. All are characterized by defective norepinephrine release from sympathetic terminals upon standing, resulting in impaired vasoconstriction. NOH is defined as a drop in systolic blood pressure ≥20 mmHg or diastolic blood pressure ≥10 mmHg, or both, within 3 minutes of standing or head up-tilt at a minimum of 60°. However, approximately 50% of patients have associated supine hypertension, which greatly complicates treatment. Supine hypertension not only is a common side effect of many anti-hypotensive agents but is also present in untreated patients, suggesting it is, in part, innate to the pathophysiology of autonomic dysfunction. Pathological mechanisms differ depending on the underlying autonomic disorder. In central neurodegenerative disorders, residual post-ganglionic sympathetic activity is likely the primary mechanism, whereas plasma angiotensin, aldosterone, and inappropriate mineralocorticoid receptor activity may contribute in peripheral autonomic lesions. Baroreflex failure/loss of baroreflex buffering is common to both. More work is required. Clinically, there is much dispute regarding the treatment of supine hypertension when there is a risk of exacerbating orthostatic hypotension. However, given the similar levels of end-organ damage (i.e., heart attack and stroke) seen with transient hypertension, it seems clear that treatment is important. Current therapies for both NOH and supine hypertension include a combination of pharmacological and conservative measures. However, in addition to the current standard of care, protocols may consider 24-h blood pressure monitoring and potential future examination of the peripheral post-ganglionic sympathetic nerves in order to apply individualized adjunct therapies. Finally, no anti-hypertensive agents are currently approved for use in this patient population, and development of novel therapies should focus on short-acting agents, selective to the supine position, that act primarily at night when hypertension is most severe/prolonged.