SEARCH_TOPIC: Vaccination schedules
TITLE: Pneumococcal conjugate vaccination schedules in infants-acquisition, immunogenicity, and pneumococcal conjugate and yellow fever vaccine co-administration study: statistical analysis plan.
PMID: 38532475
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38532475/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The effectiveness of immunisation with pneumococcal conjugate vaccine (PCV) has been demonstrated in many countries. However, the global impact of PCV is limited by its cost, which has prevented its introduction in some countries. Reducing the cost of PCV programmes will facilitate further vaccine introductions and improve the sustainability of PCV in low-income countries when they transition from subsidised vaccine supply. We are conducting a large, population-level, cluster-randomised field trial (PVS) of an alternative reduced-dose schedule of PCV compared to the standard schedule. We are also conducting a nested sub-study at the individual level to investigate the immunogenicity of the two schedules and their effects on pneumococcal carriage acquisition (PVS-AcqImm). PVS-AcqImm is a prospective, cluster-randomised trial of an alternative schedule of one dose of PCV scheduled at age 6 weeks with a booster dose at age 9 months compared to the standard of three primary doses scheduled at 6, 10, and 14 weeks of age. Sub-groups within the alternative schedule group receive yellow fever vaccine separately or co-administered with PCV at 9 months of age. The primary endpoints are (a) concentrations of vaccine-type anti-pneumococcal IgG at 18 months of age, (b) proportions with yellow fever neutralising antibody titre ≥ 1:8 4 weeks after separate or co-administration of PCV and yellow fever vaccines, and (c) rate of nasopharyngeal vaccine-type pneumococcal acquisition from 10-14 months of age. Participants and field staff are not masked to group allocation while measurement of the laboratory endpoints is masked. Approximately equal numbers of participants are resident in each of 28 randomly allocated geographic clusters (14 clusters in each group); 784 enrolled for acquisition measurements and 336 for immunogenicity measurements. This statistical analysis plan (SAP) describes the PVS-AcqImm cohort and follow-up criteria to be used in different analyses. The SAP defines the endpoints and describes how adherence to the interventions will be presented. We describe the approach to analyses and how we will account for the effect of clustering. Defining the SAP prior to the conduct of analysis will avoid bias in analyses that may arise from prior knowledge of trial findings. ISRCTN, ISRCTN7282161328. Registered on 28 November 2019. https://www.isrctn.com/ISRCTN72821613 . MRCG SCC number 1670, LSHTM Ref 17683. Current protocol version: 6.0, 24 May 2021. Version: 1.0 (5 April 2023); SAP revisions-none.