SEARCH_TOPIC: Radiation therapy
TITLE: Radiation therapy for patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer: Evolving techniques and treatment strategies.
PMID: 32471736
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32471736/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Despite ongoing efforts, patients with locally advanced pancreatic cancer (LAPC) continue to have a dismal prognosis. Such tumors are unresectable, and optimal treatment with chemotherapy and/or radiation therapy is still not established. While chemotherapy is conventionally aimed at preventing metastatic spread of disease, radiation therapy acts locally, improving local control which can potentially improve overall survival and most importantly quality of life. Here, we aim to review the primary literature assessing the role of diverse radiation therapy strategies for patients with LAPC. Many radiation regimens can be considered, and no standard treatment has demonstrated a clear improvement in clinical outcomes. We advise that the modality of choice be dependent on the availability of equipment, the dose and fractionation of treatment, as well as the dose received by normal tissue. Moreover, a candid discussion with the patient concerning treatment goals is equally as essential. Three notable strategies for LAPC are intensity-modulated radiation therapy, volumetric modulated arc therapy, and proton. These radiation modalities tend to have improved dose distribution to the target volumes, while minimizing the radiation dose to surrounding normal tissues. Stereotactic body radiation therapy can also be considered in LAPC patients in cases where the tumor does not invade the duodenum or other neighboring structures. Because of the high doses delivered by stereotactic body radiation therapy, proper respiratory and tumor motion management should be implemented to reduce collateral radiation dosing. Despite improved clinical outcomes with modern radiation modalities, evolving techniques, and more accurate planning, future studies remain essential to elucidate the optimal role for radiation therapy among patients with LAPC.