SEARCH_TOPIC: Type 2 Diabetes
TITLE: Barriers and facilitators to type 2 diabetes management in the Caribbean region: a qualitative systematic review.
PMID: 33394623
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33394623/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The objective of this systematic review was to summarize the barriers and facilitators to type 2 diabetes mellitus management in the Caribbean region. The prevalence of type 2 diabetes mellitus in the Caribbean is of significant concern. Poor management of type 2 diabetes mellitus increases the risks of complications and death. Several studies have been conducted to explore the barriers and facilitators to type 2 diabetes mellitus management in the Caribbean; however, a systematic review has yet to be conducted. Eligible participants were adults (aged 18 and above) with type 2 diabetes mellitus, their families/carers, and health care professionals whose work involves the management of type 2 diabetes mellitus in the Caribbean. The review included studies that focused on their views, experiences, attitudes, understandings, perceptions, and perspectives regarding the barriers and facilitators to type 2 diabetes mellitus management. Electronic searches of MEDLINE, Embase, CINAHL/BNI (EBSCOhost), PsycINFO, AMED, Web of Science, and Scopus were conducted from database inception to March 2020. Additionally, gray literature was searched via EThOS, OpenGrey, and ProQuest Dissertations and Theses. JBI methodology for conducting qualitative systematic reviews was followed. Screening of studies, assessment of methodological quality, and data extraction were conducted independently by two reviewers. Findings from studies were synthesized using a meta-aggregation approach, and confidence in the findings was ranked using the ConQual approach. Eight studies were included in the review, all of which focused on patients' perspectives. There were five synthesized findings, including i) cultural demands and pressures impact self-management and general care of type 2 diabetes mellitus (low confidence evidence); ii) support systems' influence on the general management of type 2 diabetes mellitus (moderate confidence evidence); iii) personal and environmental background/circumstances can encourage and limit good self-management and general management of type 2 diabetes mellitus (high confidence evidence); iv) psychological factors that influence patients' actions towards the management of type 2 diabetes mellitus (moderate confidence evidence); and v) psychological factors and their influence on patients' adherence to type 2 diabetes mellitus management (low confidence evidence). Patients in the Caribbean have multiple barriers and facilitators that limit and promote effective management of their type 2 diabetes mellitus. Identifying the barriers and facilitators to type 2 diabetes mellitus management in the Caribbean will assist with development of effective type 2 diabetes mellitus management programs. However, further qualitative studies on barriers and facilitators to type 2 diabetes mellitus management in the Caribbean that target health care professionals and families/carers should be conducted. PROSPERO CRD42018097242.