SEARCH_TOPIC: ALS
TITLE: Access for ALL in ALS: A large-scale, inclusive, collaborative consortium to unlock the molecular and genetic mechanisms of amyotrophic lateral sclerosis.
PMID: 39295118
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39295118/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Recent progress in therapeutics for amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) has spurred development and imbued the field of ALS with hope for more breakthroughs, yet substantial scientific gaps persist. This unmet need remains a stark reminder that innovative paradigms are needed to invigorate ALS research. To move toward more informative, targeted, and personalized drug development, the National Institutes of Health (NIH) established a national ALS clinical research consortium called Access for ALL in ALS (ALL ALS). This new consortium is a multi-institutional effort that aims to organize the ALS clinical research landscape in the United States. ALL ALS is operating in partnership with several stakeholders to operationalize the recommendations of the Accelerating Access to Critical Therapies for ALS Act (ACT for ALS) Public Private Partnership. ALL ALS will provide a large-scale, centralized, and readily accessible infrastructure for the collection and storage of a wide range of data from people living with ALS (symptomatic cohort) or who may be at risk of developing ALS (asymptomatic ALS gene carriers). Importantly, ALL ALS is designed to encourage community engagement, equity, and inclusion. The consortium is prioritizing the enrollment of geographically, ethnoculturally, and socioeconomically diverse participants. Collected data include longitudinal clinical data and biofluids, genomic, and digital biomarkers that will be harmonized and linked to the central Accelerating Medicines Partnership for ALS (AMP ALS) portal for sharing with the research community. The aim of ALL ALS is to deliver a comprehensive, inclusive, open-science dataset to help researchers answer important scientific questions of clinical relevance in ALS.