SEARCH_TOPIC: Malaria
TITLE: Non-falciparum malaria infections in Uganda, does it matter? A review of the published literature.
PMID: 38997728
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38997728/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Plasmodium falciparum is the dominant malaria species in the sub-Saharan Africa and the main cause of severe disease and death. Notwithstanding, severe malaria and death due to non-falciparum infections have been reported, but at much lower rates than P. falciparum infections. Following increasing use of molecular detection techniques in epidemiological studies, a higher prevalence of non-falciparum species has been reported in the region than previously thought. This article reviews the literature on the prevalence of non-falciparum malaria species in Uganda and the clinical figures of their severe diseases. It aims to elucidate the extent to which mono non-falciparum malaria infections in a highly malaria-endemic country contribute to malaria mortality and outline its policy implications on malaria case management. The available English-language published peer-reviewed literature up to March 2024 was sought via PubMed and Google Scholar. The keywords used were severe malaria, AND P. falciparum, P. malariae, P. vivax, P. ovale spp., mixed infections AND Uganda. The review encompassed 53 articles. Articles using molecular diagnosis methods were accounted for analysis. The literature reported a substantial prevalence of non-falciparum infections in Uganda. Plasmodium malariae and Plasmodium ovale spp. were the second and third most prevalent reported malaria species respectively after P. falciparum as dominant species. Non-falciparum malaria infections often occur as mixed infections rather than mono-infections. Besides, molecular diagnostics revealed that 21% of initially reported mono-infections of P. falciparum were, in fact, mixed infections. No article was found on the prevalence of severe malaria or case fatality rate due to mixed or non-falciparum infections. A critical knowledge gap exists regarding the impact of mixed and non-falciparum species on severe malaria and death in Uganda. Robust evidence on prevalence, recurrent parasitaemia, and severe clinical manifestations of mixed and non-falciparum malaria infections is crucial for evidence-based and effective policymaking regarding malaria case management.