SEARCH_TOPIC: Pandemic preparedness
TITLE: Financing for pandemic preparedness and response measures: a systematic scoping review.
PMID: 38680465
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38680465/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
To obtain insights into reducing the shortfall in financing for pandemic preparedness and response measures, and reducing the risk of another pandemic with social and economic costs comparable to those of the coronavirus disease. We conducted a systematic scoping review using the databases ScienceDirect, Scopus, JSTOR, PubMed® and EconLit. We included articles published in any language until 1 August 2023, and excluded grey literature and publications on epidemics. We categorized eligible studies according to the elements of a framework proposed by the World Health Organization Council on the Economy of Health for All: (i) root/structural causes; (ii) social position/foundations; (iii) infrastructure and systems; and (iv) communities, households and individuals. Of the 188 initially identified articles, we included 60 in our review. Most (53/60) were published after 2020, when academic interest had shifted towards global financing mechanisms. Most (37/60) addressed two or more of the council framework elements. The most frequently addressed element was infrastructure and systems (54/60), discussing topics such as health systems, financial markets and innovation ecosystems. The roots/structural causes were discussed in 25 articles; communities, households and individuals in 22 articles; and social positions/foundations in 11. Our review identified three important gaps: a formal definition of pandemic preparedness and response, impeding the accurate quantification of the financing shortfall; research on the extent to which financing for pandemic preparedness and response has been targeted at the most vulnerable households; and an analysis of specific financial instruments and an evaluation of the feasibility of their implementation.