SEARCH_TOPIC: Water quality and health
TITLE: Water quality and health risk assessment of heavy metals in groundwater of Ranbir Singh Pura tehsil of Jammu and Kashmir, India.
PMID: 37552319
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37552319/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Groundwater is one of the important sources available for drinking, agricultural, domestic, and various other purposes in the study area. Study area is having agricultural importance and is famous for Basmati rice production in the world. In order to assess water suitability for irrigation and drinking purposes, 25 sampling sites were selected and water samples were collected from handpumps, borewells and motors from May 2022 to June 2022. Fifteen physico-chemical parameters and water quality index (WQI) was calculated to assess the drinking water suitability. The results obtained then compared with the BIS (2012) and WHO drinking water guidelines. For irrigation water suitability, irrigation water quality index (IWQI) and other indices were calculated. Heavy metal health risk assessment was also evaluated using target hazard quotient (THQ), carcinogenic risks (CR), non-carcinogenic risks, heavy metal pollution index (HPI), etc. Study found 60% of water samples under poor category of WQI. All water samples were found suitable for irrigation purposes according to different indices except for permeability index for which only 32% samples were found suitable. IWQI classifies 52%, 32%, and 12% of water samples under moderate, low, and no restriction category respectively. Groundwater of the study area found to be contaminated with copper (Cu), iron (Fe), lead (Pb), and chromium (Cr) while low contamination of zinc (Zn) and arsenic (As) was found according to heavy metal evaluation index (HEI). High contamination of chromium (HPI= 9740.8) and lead (HPI=188) was recorded as per HPI. HQ value for men, women, and children in case of zinc were found safe while HQ values for copper and lead in all population groups were found at risk. Overall, the study area was found highly contaminated with the lead, copper, and chromium concentrations. Thus, study recommends regular monitoring of the groundwater of study area as well as treatment before using this water for drinking purposes.