SEARCH_TOPIC: Cognitive rehabilitation
TITLE: Impact of Cognitive Rehabilitation on Cognitive and Functional Outcomes in Adult Cancer Survivors: A Systematic Review.
PMID: 39048409
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39048409/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
This systematic review (PROSPERO CRD42021275421) synthesized evidence on the efficacy of cognitive rehabilitation on cognitive and functional outcomes in adult cancer survivors. Articles were identified though PubMed/MEDLINE, EMBASE, PsycINFO, and Web of Science from inception through June 30, 2023. Studies included participants ≥18 years old, diagnosed with cancer. Primary outcomes were validated measures of subjective and objective cognition. Articles were dual reviewed for eligibility and data extraction. Risk of bias was assessed with the Standard Quality Assessment Criteria for Evaluating Primary Research Papers from a Variety of Fields. The search yielded 3,811 articles; 65 full-text articles were reviewed; 53 articles (15 cognitive training, 14 strategy-based, 21 combinations, three inpatient rehabilitation), representing 52 unique studies, were included. Positive effects were observed in at least one objective cognitive measure in 93% of strategy training, 81% of cognitive training, 79% of combination rehabilitation interventions. Positive effects were observed in subjective cognition in 100% of strategy training, 55% of cognitive training, and 92% of combination interventions. Among studies with comparator groups, processing speed improved in 60% of cognitive training studies, while strategy training did not improve processing speed; otherwise, cognitive domain effects were similar between intervention types. Impact on functional outcomes was inconclusive. Cognitive rehabilitation appear beneficial for cancer-related cognitive impairment (CRCI). Differential effects on specific cognitive domains (eg, processing speed) and subjective cognition may exist between intervention types. Nurses should increase patient and provider awareness of the benefits of cognitive rehabilitation for CRCI.