SEARCH_TOPIC: Hearing loss
TITLE: Prevalence of hearing loss in patients with Sjögren syndrome: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
PMID: 36305918
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36305918/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Sjögren syndrome (SS) is a multisystem autoimmune disease, primarily targeting salivary and lacrimal glands; skin, nasal and vaginal dryness, along with musculoskeletal pain and fatigue are the most commonly reported symptoms. Hearing loss is hypothesized to be frequent as well. The purpose of this systematic review was to estimate the prevalence of Hearing loss and its different subtypes in patients with Sjögren syndrome. PRISMA guidelines were followed to ensure highest quality for our systematic review. A random effects model meta-analysis and meta-regression was conducted using I<sup>2</sup> as heterogeneity indicator. Eleven observational studies were included in this systematic review. Ten of them were cross-sectional, while one study was case-control. Studies were assessed for risk of bias: all were rated to a moderate level, except for two rated to a low level. Pooled prevalence of any type of hearing loss was 52.2%. After excluding studies rated to moderate bias, the pooled prevalence of hearing loss was 36.7%. We also conducted a subgroup analysis depending on type of hearing loss. Pooled prevalence of sensorineural hearing loss was 42.6%., while pooled prevalence of conductive hearing loss and mixed hearing loss were 5% and 2.3%, respectively. Meta-regression was conducted in an effort to identify possible variables capable to explain high heterogeneity between studies. Sample size and year of study were separately found to account for a portion of heterogeneity between studies of sensorineural hearing loss. Year of study was also found to account for a portion of heterogeneity between studies of conductive hearing loss. In conclusion, sensorineural hearing loss, is highly prevalent in patients with Sjögren syndrome. On this basis, early screening and follow-up of patients with Sjögren syndrome by pure tone audiometry is important.