SEARCH_TOPIC: Dental cavities
TITLE: Organo-selenium containing dental sealant inhibits biofilm formation by oral bacteria.
PMID: 35428495
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35428495/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Dental plaque is a complex structure (called a biofilm) that is produced by a community of oral bacteria. As microorganisms accumulate in the oral cavity, bacteria can assemble into biofilms that protect them from antibiotics and disinfectants, which contribute to dental cavities and oral infections that acts as the seed for further infections throughout the body. Therefore, there is great interest in developing dental sealants that can effectively eliminate biofilms formed from an assortment of oral bacteria species. In previous papers, it was shown that both in vivo and in vitro use of organo-selenium dental sealants have the potential to be an effective method for preventing dental caries and plaque formation. However, our previous in vitro study only examined the effect of the organo-selenium sealants on Streptococcus mutans and salivarius. Since that time, this organo-selenium sealant has been changed to improve its curing time. We showed a selenium containing sealant (SeLECT-DefenseTM) can completely eliminate biofilm formation on the sealant at selenium concentrations of 0.25% and higher, by S. salivarius, S. sanguinis, or S. mutans, individually or in combination. This selenium containing sealant can also completely inhibit the same bacteria from growing under the sealant, while control sealant cannot. The selenium containing sealant was tested for stability and it was found to still kill these same bacteria after soaking for the equivalent of one year in PBS (pH 7.4). It was also found that the combination of the three bacteria were also killed by the selenium sealant, thus ruling out potential synergism of the bacteria in forming resistance. The following study showed that this modified selenium dental sealant effectively eliminates species of bacteria both on and under the dental sealant.