SEARCH_TOPIC: Rural healthcare
TITLE: The healthcare system and client failures contributing to maternal mortality in rural Kenya.
PMID: 36471265
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36471265/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The global maternal mortality ratio is estimated at 211/100 000 live births in 2017. In Kenya, progress on reducing maternal mortality appears to be slow and persistently higher than the global average, despite efforts by the government's provision of free maternity services in both private and public facilities in 2013. We aimed to explore and describe the experiences of midwives on maternal deaths that are associated with the healthcare system and client failures in Migori, Kenya. An explanatory, qualitative approach method was adopted. In-depth interviews were conducted with the purposively selected midwives working in peripartum units of the three sampled hospitals within Migori County in Kenya. The hospitals included two county referral hospitals and one private referral hospital. Saturation was reached with 37 respondents. NVivo 11 software was used for analysis. Content analysis using a qualitative approach was adopted. Accordingly, the data transcripts were synthesised, coded and organised into thematic domains. Identified sub-themes: sub-optimal care, staff inadequacy, theatre delays, lack of blood and essential drugs, non-adherence to protocols, staff shortage, inadequate equipment and supplies, unavailable ICU wards, clients' ANC non-adherence. In conclusion, the study notes that the healthcare system and client failures are contributing to maternal mortality in the study setting. The major failures are across the pregnancy continuum starting from antenatal care, and intrapartum to post-natal care. This can illustrate that some pregnant mothers are getting sub-optimal care reducing their survival chances. To reduce maternal mortality in Migori County, the key highlighted healthcare system and client failures should be addressed through a multidisciplinary approach mechanism.