SEARCH_TOPIC: Safe sex practices
TITLE: Sexual practices, their influencers, and utilization of HIV services among female sex workers in Mombasa County, Kenya.
PMID: 39247770
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39247770/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
female sex workers (FSWs) are vulnerable to acquiring HIV and other sexually transmitted infections due to unprotected sex. Understanding and addressing the gaps in safer sex among FSWs can help to reduce HIV acquisition and transmission. This study described sexual practices, their correlates and use of HIV services among FSWs in Mombasa County, Kenya. participants were recruited for a baseline survey by a time-location cluster randomized design at predetermined intervals from five bars and five clubs in Mombasa County until a sample size of 160 was reached. Descriptive statistics and inferential analysis using R were conducted, and p<0.05 was regarded as statistically significant. nearly all (99%) of the participants were unmarried, and 11% had tertiary education. Ninety-eight percent (98%) reported vaginal intercourse, 51% reported using alcohol/drugs before sex, and 28% practiced unprotected intercourse. About 64% had tested for HIV within three months, 14% believed that it is safe to reuse condoms, and 10% that it is safe to engage in unprotected sex. In bi-variate analysis, FSWs were more likely to engage in unprotected intercourse if they reported more frequent sex, more frequent sex with regular clients, poor HIV knowledge, alcohol/drug use, and violence. In multivariate analysis, risky sexual practices were associated with frequency of sexual intercourse, alcohol/drug use, and poor HIV knowledge. female sex workers engage in unprotected sex while under the influence of substances, belief in re-using condoms and have high frequency of sexual intercourse. Inadequate knowledge of HIV and substance use significantly correlated with unprotected sex. Interventions to address these modifiable factors are needed to mitigate the risk of HIV among FSWs.