SEARCH_TOPIC: Prenatal testing
TITLE: Comparing Non-invasive Prenatal Testing With Invasive Testing for the Detection of Trisomy 21.
PMID: 36514620
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36514620/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Background Non-invasive prenatal test (NIPT) is an intermediate step between serum screening and invasive diagnostic testing. It involves analysis of the cell-free fetal DNA (cffDNA) present in the maternal blood sample for determining the likelihood of fetal aneuploidy. Owing to its high sensitivity and specificity, NIPT has quickly gained popularity across the globe since its introduction to clinical practice, making it an attractive alternative to the available screening and diagnostic tests in use. Amniocentesis is currently the gold standard test for obtaining fetal DNA and diagnosing fetal trisomy prenatally, but it is invasive and has procedure-related adverse effects. This study aims to compare NIPT and amniocentesis in pregnancies screened positive for fetal trisomy. Material and methods This is an analytic cross-sectional prospective study conducted in the Department of Obstetrics & Gynecology, Patna Medical College and Hospital, for two and half years from December 2018 to June 2021. A total of 34 pregnant women screened positive for trisomy 21, attending the antenatal care outpatient department, in their second trimester, with their written consent, were enrolled in the study. Results Out of 34 pregnant patients, three refused NIPT and directly opted for amniocentesis. A total of 31 pregnant women have undergone NIPT. A total of 28 cases were positive for trisomy 21 on both NIPT and amniocentesis. The sensitivity of NIPT was 100% with the confidence interval being 87.66% to 100.00%. The specificity of NIPT was 100% with the confidence interval being 29.24% to 100.00%. Conclusion The high performance and effectiveness of NIPT are undeniable. Though the process by which this test has to be integrated into the clinical practice needs more study and should be determined with meticulous assessment.