SEARCH_TOPIC: Laparoscopic surgery
TITLE: Laparoscopic surgery for presumed benign ovarian tumor during pregnancy.
PMID: 23440802
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/23440802/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The surgical management of ovarian tumors in pregnancy is similar to that of non-pregnant women. The procedures include resection of the tumor (enucleation), removal of an ovary or ovaries (oophorectomy), or surgical excision of the fallopian tube and ovary (salpingo-oophorectomy). The procedure can be done by open surgery (laparotomy) or keyhole surgery (laparoscopy) technique. The benefits of laparoscopic surgery include shorter hospital stay, earlier return to normal activity, and reduced postoperative pain. However, conventional laparoscopic surgery techniques required the infusion of gas carbon dioxide in the peritoneum to distend the abdomen and displace the bowel upward to create the room for surgical manipulation. Serious complications such as abnormally high levels of carbon dioxide in the circulating blood (hypercarbia) and perforation of internal organs have also been reported. These serious complication may be harmful to the fetus. To compare the effects of using laparoscopic surgery for benign ovarian tumor during pregnancy on maternal and fetal health and the use of healthcare resources. We updated the search of the Cochrane Pregnancy and Childbirth Group's Trials Register on 11 November 2012. Randomized controlled trials with reported data that compared outcomes of laparoscopic surgery for benign ovarian tumor in pregnancy to conventional laparotomy technique. Two review authors planned to independently assess trial quality and extract data. The updated search did not identify any randomized controlled trials. The practice of laparoscopic surgery for benign ovarian tumour during pregnancy is associated with benefits and harms. However, the evidence for the magnitude of these benefits and harms is drawn from case series studies, associated with potential bias. The results and conclusions of these studies must therefore be interpreted with caution.The available case series studies of laparoscopic surgery for benign ovarian tumour during pregnancy provide limited insight into the potential benefits and harms associated with this new surgical technique in pregnancy. Randomized controlled trials are required to provide the most reliable evidence regarding the benefits and harms of laparoscopic surgery for benign ovarian tumour during pregnancy.