SEARCH_TOPIC: Prenatal testing
TITLE: Prenatal treatment path for angelman syndrome and other neurodevelopmental disorders.
PMID: 31490639
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31490639/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Angelman syndrome (AS) is a rare neurodevelopmental disorder caused by mutation or deletion of the maternally inherited UBE3A allele. These pathogenic mutations lead to loss of maternal UBE3A expression in neurons. Antisense oligonucleotides and gene therapies are in development, which activate the intact but epigenetically silenced paternal UBE3A allele. Preclinical studies indicate that treating during the prenatal period could greatly reduce the severity of symptoms or prevent AS from developing. Genetic tests can detect the chromosome 15q11-q13 deletion that is the most common cause of AS. New, highly sensitive noninvasive prenatal tests that take advantage of single-cell genome sequencing technologies are expected to enter the clinic in the coming years and make early genetic diagnosis of AS more common. Efforts are needed to identify fetuses and newborns with maternal 15q11-q13 deletions and to phenotype these babies relative to neurotypical controls. Clinical and parent observations suggest AS symptoms are detectable in infants, including reports of problems with feeding and motor function. Quantitative phenotypes in the 0- to 1-year age range will permit a more rapid assessment of efficacy when future treatments are administered prenatally or shortly after birth. Although prenatal therapies are currently not available for AS, prenatal testing combined with prenatal treatment has the potential to revolutionize how clinicians detect and treat babies before they are symptomatic. This pioneering prenatal treatment path for AS will lay the foundation for treating other syndromic neurodevelopmental disorders. Autism Res 2020, 13: 11-17. © 2019 International Society for Autism Research, Wiley Periodicals, Inc. LAY SUMMARY: Prenatal treatment could benefit expectant parents whose babies test positive for the chromosome microdeletion that causes Angelman syndrome (AS). Prenatal treatment is predicted to have better outcomes than treating after symptoms develop and may even prevent AS altogether. This approach could generally be applied to the treatment of other syndromic neurodevelopmental disorders.