SEARCH_TOPIC: Geriatric psychiatry
TITLE: Evidence-oriented teaching of geriatric psychiatry: a narrative literature synthesis and pilot evaluation of a clerkship seminar.
PMID: 35692363
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35692363/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The field of geriatric psychiatry has in recent decades developed into an independent discipline, incorporating elements of psychiatry, neurology and internal medicine. In view of demographic changes, this field is becoming increasingly relevant for primary care and undergraduate medical training. So far, however, there is little educational guidance for instructional design of geriatric psychiatry in undergraduate medical education. A narrative literature review of medical education studies in the field of geriatric psychiatry was conducted. Student evaluations of a geriatric psychiatry clerkship seminar were analyzed, followed by a target group analysis. Results informed the iterative development of new clerkship seminar content and structure. This was implemented and evaluated over several academic cycles. Learning material was made available via the open-source learning management system "ILIAS". A total of 29 medical education articles were identified and evaluated. The previous seminar in geriatric psychiatry at our university hospital was rated below average (Likert item overall rating of 4.3/6 compared to other seminars with an average overall rating of 5.2, p<0.001). An evidence-oriented revision of the content and instructional design was implemented. Activation of learners, self-reference effect, and audience questioning were used during the lecture. Additionally, two geriatric psychiatry case scenarios were adapted for discussion. We saw continuous improvement of student evaluations of the revised course, reaching a rating improvement of 5.3 out of 6 (p<0.01, U=135.5 Cohen's d=1.28). A systematic approach was used to develop a geriatric psychiatry clerkship seminar, based on medical education evidence, for undergraduate medical students, resulting in better student evaluations. The teaching materials can be adapted for local implementation at other teaching hospitals. Future studies should also explore effects regarding higher learning outcomes.