SEARCH_TOPIC: Sexual health
TITLE: Impaired sexual health among women treated for vulvar cancer: An integrated review.
PMID: 37221928
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37221928/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Although gynaecological cancer's negative effects on sexual function are well known, most studies on the subject have not included vulvar cancer patients or a multidimensional perspective on sexual health. Therefore, this review aimed to address this research gap and explored the impact of vulvar cancer on women's sexual health from a multidimensional perspective. An integrated review was conducted, as described by Whittemore and Knafl. The PubMed, CINAHL, PsycINFO and Embase databases were searched in March 2021 and updated in August 2022 and March 2023. The data were thematically analysed using NVivo, and the PRISMA-ScR and ENTREQ guidelines were followed. The following themes were identified in the 28 reviewed articles: impact of a changed female body, impact on women's sexual identity, consequences for women's sexual relationships and unmet needs and loneliness caused by taboos about sexual health. Women's impaired sexual health after vulvar cancer points to a great need to understand and holistically investigate sexual health. In addition, healthcare professionals have an obligation to care for the sexual health issues of patients with vulvar cancer. However, most questionnaires used in the selected studies revealed a narrow understanding of sexual health and focused on sexuality as a genital activity. The sexual health of women with vulvar cancer was tabooed and stigmatised for patients and healthcare professionals. Consequently, women received sparse sexual guidance, felt isolated and had unmet needs. Healthcare professionals need knowledge and training on how to break taboos and address the sexual needs of vulvar cancer patients. Systematic screenings for sexual health needs should be conducted using a multidimensional perspective. The protocol was preregistered at the Open Science Framework (www.osf.io), registration DOI: https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/YDA2Q PATIENT OR PUBLIC CONTRIBUTION: No patient or public contribution.