SEARCH_TOPIC: Calcium requirements
TITLE: Calcium and peak bone mass.
PMID: 1541939
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/1541939/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
On the basis of previous epidemiological, clinical and experimental studies, it was demonstrated that adequate calcium intake during growth may influence peak bone mass/density, and may be instrumental in preventing subsequent postmenopausal and senile osteoporosis. Calcium intake during adolescence appears to affect skeletal calcium retention directly, and a calcium intake of up to 1600 mg d-1 may be required. Therefore, adolescent females at the time of puberty probably represent the optimal population for early prevention of osteoporosis with calcium. Young individuals must be in positive calcium balance to provide the calcium necessary for skeletal modelling and consolidation, but the degree of positive balance required to achieve peak bone mass and density is unknown. To assess calcium requirements in young individuals, and also to evaluate the determinants of calcium metabolism during the period of acquisition of peak bone mass, 487 calcium balances from previously published reports have been collected and analysed according to developmental phase and calcium intake. The results of this analysis showed that calcium intake and skeletal modelling/turnover are the most important determinants of calcium balance during growth. The highest requirements for calcium are during infancy and adolescence, and then during childhood and young adulthood. Infants (adequate vitamin D supply) and adolescents have higher calcium absorption than children and young adults to meet their high calcium requirements. Calcium absorption during the periods of rapid bone modelling/turnover is probably mediated by Nicolaysen's endogenous factor. Urinary calcium increases with age, and reaches a maximum by the end of puberty. The results also show that calcium intake has little effect on urinary calcium excretion during the period of most rapid skeletal formation: a weak correlation is present in children and young adults. On the basis of the above studies it was suggested that the RDA for calcium should be higher than currently established for children, adolescents, and young adults, in order to ensure a level of skeletal retention of calcium sufficient for maximal peak bone mass. In addition to nutrition, heredity (both parents) and endocrine factors (sexual development) appear to have profound effects on peak bone mass formation. Most of the skeletal mass will be accumulated by late adolescence, indicating early timing of peak bone mass.