SEARCH_TOPIC: Varicose veins
TITLE: Varicose veins as a risk factor for venous thromboembolism in arthroplasty patients: Meta-analysis.
PMID: 36609190
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36609190/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
A meta-analysis to determine if patients with varicose veins are at an increased risk of venous thromboembolism (VTE) when undergoing major lower limb arthroplasty. Medline, Embase, and Cochrane Library databases were searched using appropriate terms for studies that reported post-operative VTE in patients who had lower limb arthroplasty with any history of varicose veins. Methodological quality of included studies was quantified using the Risk of Bias (ROB) assessment tools. Findings were reported using the meta-analysis of observational studies in epidemiology (MOOSE) checklist. A total of 129 studies were identified with 11 observational studies being eligible for inclusion. This consisted of 265,194 patients who underwent lower limb arthroplasty, 2188 of which had pre-existing varicose veins. Overall, VTE occurred in 1845 patients, and 122 cases had varicose veins present at time of arthroplasty. Meta-analysis indicates that patients undergoing lower limb arthroplasty with varicose veins are at increased risk of having a VTE, OR 2.37, 95% CI 1.54-3.63, (<i>p</i> < 0.001). One study evaluated if previous varicose veins surgery influenced the risk of VTE in arthroplasty patients, OR 0.96 (95% CI 0.7-1.28), <i>p</i> = 0.429. Varicose veins and lower limb arthroplasty are known independent risk factors for VTE. There is a paucity of data regarding the risk of VTE in patients undergoing lower limb arthroplasty who have co-existing varicose veins. This meta-analysis shows that patients with varicose veins are at an increased risk of VTE when undergoing major lower limb arthroplasty. Further studies are required in order to determine if such patients should undergo varicose vein surgery before undertaking major lower limb joint replacement.