SEARCH_TOPIC: Urban health issues
TITLE: Five urban health research traditions: A meta-narrative review.
PMID: 37820495
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37820495/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Urban health scholars explore the connection between the urban space and health through ontological perspectives that are shaped by their disciplinary traditions. Without explicit recognition of the different approaches, there are barriers to collaboration. This paper maps the terrain of the urban health scholarship to identify key urban health research traditions; and to articulate the main features distinguishing these different traditions. We apply a meta-narrative review guided by a bibliometric co-citation network analysis to the body of research on urban health retrieved from the Web of Science Core Collection. Five urban health research traditions were identified: (1) sustainable urban development, (2) urban ecosystem services, (3) urban resilience, (4) healthy urban planning, and (5) urban green spaces. Each research tradition has a different conceptual and thematic perspective to addressing urban health. These include perspectives on the scale of the urban health issue of interest, and on the conceptualisation of the urban context and health. Additionally, we developed a framework to allow for better differentiation between the differing research traditions based on (1) perspectives of the urban system as complicated or complex, (2) the preferred locus of change as a function of structure and agency and (3) the geographic scale of the urban health issue that is addressed. These dimensions have even deeper implications for transdisciplinary collaboration as they are underpinned by paradigmatic differences, rather than disciplinary differences. We conclude that it is essential for urban health researchers to reflect on the different urban health approaches and seek coherence by understanding their similarities and differences. Such endeavours are required to produce and interpret transdisciplinary knowledge for the goal of improving health by transforming urban systems.