SEARCH_TOPIC: Exercise for seniors
TITLE: The impact of physical activity and exercise interventions on symptoms for women experiencing menopause: overview of reviews.
PMID: 39003439
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39003439/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Women experiencing problematic menopausal symptoms report lower health-related quality of life and greater healthcare use than women without symptoms. Not all women want to or are able to take hormone replacement therapy. Strengthening the evidence for menopause symptom-management options, including physical activity, improves agency for women. This overview assesses effectiveness of physical activity and exercise interventions targeting women experiencing menopause symptoms. Medline, Embase, CINAHL, Scopus, The Cochrane Database of Systematic Reviews and Social Science Citation Index were searched (June 2023) for systematic reviews of physical activity and exercise interventions targeting women experiencing menopause. Reviews were assessed using AMSTAR-2 and a best-evidence approach to synthesis without meta-analysis (SWIM) was adopted. The protocol was registered on PROSPERO (CRD42022298908). Seventeen reviews included 80 unique relevant primary studies with 8983 participants. There is evidence showing improvement of physical, urogenital, and total symptoms following yoga interventions. Evidence for vasomotor and psychological symptoms was inconclusive. Findings for aerobic exercise were inconclusive although there were some examples of beneficial effects on total and vasomotor symptoms. Evidence was very limited for other types of physical activity and impact on physical, sexual and urogenital symptoms. There is some evidence that yoga, and to lesser extent, aerobic exercise may be beneficial for some menopause symptoms, but there is insufficient evidence to recommend a particular form of exercise. Current reviews categorise women on menopause status; broadening this to include ethnicity, income status, employment and other factors will allow better understanding of context for successful interventions.