SEARCH_TOPIC: Shingles
TITLE: Shingles vaccination uptake in Massachusetts adults aged 50 years and older.
PMID: 34625290
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34625290/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Shingles (herpes zoster), a medical condition caused by reactivation of latent varicella zoster virus and characterized by painful rash, will affect almost one third of Americans during their lifetime. A licensed vaccine (zoster vaccine live [ZVL]) was recommended for individuals ≥ 60 years old in 2008 to reduce shingles incidence. The Healthy People (HP) 2020 target for shingles vaccination in ≥ 60 year-olds was 30%; in 2014, it stood at 31.8% and in 2017 at 34.9%. While the national coverage target is met, variability remains across age, gender and ethnicity. Understanding factors influencing patient acceptance of the shingles vaccination is needed to help guide program activities and improve vaccination coverage in the adult population. To understand Massachusetts consumers' knowledge, attitudes, behaviors, and barriers to obtaining a shingles vaccination. We performed a telephone survey using a stratified sample of Massachusetts residents ≥ 50 years-old who i) responded to the 2012 Massachusetts Behavioral Risk Factor Surveillance System (n = 10,822), ii) agreed to a follow-up survey (n = 6,873), and iii) reported awareness of the shingles vaccination (n = 1,000; n = 529 vaccinated respondents (VR) and n = 471 non-vaccinated respondents (NVR)). Multivariable logistic regression identified factors independently associated with receiving shingles vaccination. Across both groups, most respondents (n = 989, 99%) were aware of shingles, perceived shingles as painful, and knew ofothers who had hadshingles. Multivariable logistic regression indicated an association between shingles vaccination and physician recommendation, influenza vaccination, and perception of shingles risk. More than half of the sub-sample reported not knowing about shingles vaccine, therefore, opportunities to increase awareness should be prioritized. Since provider recommendation and flu vaccination receipt had the greatest odds of increasing shingles vaccination, standard practice should include adding shingles to flu vaccine recommendations for age-eligible patients.