SEARCH_TOPIC: COVID-19
TITLE: Exosomes in COVID-19 infection: Focus on role in diagnosis, pathogenesis, immunity, and clinical trials.
PMID: 36934395
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36934395/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Since the end of 2019, severe acute respiratory syndrome coronavirus 2 (SARS-CoV-2) has spread as a new strain of coronavirus disease (COVID-19) and progressed as a global pandemic. Exosomes are membrane-bound vesicles released from almost all cells and are crucially involved in cell-cell communication. Interestingly, COVID-19 viral particles produce exosomes that moderate communication between infected and uninfected cells. Hence, there is growing evidence highlighting the crucial implications of exosomes in COVID-19 infection, transmission, intercellular spread, and reinfection. On the other hand, clinical trials have demonstrated mesenchymal stem cell-derived exosomes as a promising therapeutic strategy for severely affected COVID-19 patients. Also, convalescent plasma-derived exosomes have been proposed for multiple efficacies in COVID-19 patients. Furthermore, messenger RNAs (mRNA)-loaded exosomes were superior to mRNA-loaded lipid nanoparticles as a delivery system. Hence, exosomes can be used to safely induce SARS-CoV-2 immunity via their loading with mRNAs encoding immunogenic forms of SARS-CoV-2 spike and nucleocapsid proteins. Moreover, exosomes can be used as a nano-delivery system for microRNA to alleviate cytokine storm and prevent the progression of organ failure in COVID-19 patients. The present review summarizes state of the art concerning the role of exosomes in COVID-19 infection and accompanying organ complications as well as the potential use of exosomes in COVID-19 diagnosis, treatment, drug delivery, and vaccination. The review also sheds the light on the common biogenic pathway between the SARS-CoV-2 virus and exosomes. Additionally, the latest and current clinical trials using exosomes for COVID-19 infection are summarized.