SEARCH_TOPIC: Tetanus shot
TITLE: [Pregnancy and vaccinoprevention].
PMID: 24919344
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/24919344/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Vaccinations protect woman and her fetus against different infectious diseases, but their application on pregnant should be extremely responsible. In this review I present information about some infectious diseases and vaccines during pregnancy. Women, planning to get pregnant should be advised to do serological tests in order to find out their immune status against some infections, leading to fetal congenital malformations (rubella, chicken pox, hepatitis B) and if necessary to get vaccinated at least a month before pregnancy. Despite the lack of vaccines against Cytomegalovirus (CMV), parvovirus 19 and Toxoplasma gondii it is good to know woman's immune status against these infections in order to clarify the clinical approach in case of future contact with sick or carriers. Parvovirus 19 could cause fetal death, while CMV could be transmitted to the child. Immune women wouldn't get sick and wouldn't transmit Toxoplasmagondii to the fetus during pregnancy. Recommended vaccines before pregnancy include vaccines against flu, human papilloma virus, MMR (morbilli, measles, rubella), Tdap (tetanus, diphtheria, whooping cough), chicken pox. CDC-Atlanta recommends during pregnancy two vaccines--against flu, in case it wasn't done before pregnancy, and Tdap during every pregnancy between 27-th and 36-th gestation week. Whooping cough is very dangerous for the baby during the first two months after birth, while it is not yet vaccinated. From this point of view it is of best interest of the mother to have strong immunity in order to transfer antibodies during breastfeeding, as well as for the father and the rest who will take care for the newborn child to be vaccinated against whooping cough. During pregnancy vaccinations against tuberculosis, morbilli, measles, rubella, meningococcal disease, typhoid fever and chicken pox are contraindicated. In case of contact vaccinations against rabies, anthrax, small pox, poliomyelitis and yellow fever should be taken into consideration. Immediately after birth, if the vaccination against whooping cough is missed young mother vaccination is recommended. The vaccination is one of the greatest achievements of the modern medicine, but it is still an object of vigorous attacks, concerning used products safety. One of the most spreading fears is about sterility after vaccination. Over a period of three years (2009-2012) 563 women were vaccinated by SACMEH against HPV. Forty two of them (13.40%) interrupt vaccination due to pregnancy (18 of them after the first shot and 24 after the second shot). Our observations show, that this vaccine is carried out good by the patients, tit is safe and does not cause sterility.