SEARCH_TOPIC: Vaping health risks
TITLE: Youth vaping: a review and update on global epidemiology, physical and behavioral health risks, and clinical considerations.
PMID: 34396473
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34396473/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Worldwide, youth electronic cigarette use (vaping) has risen significantly over the past decade. This public health concern has spurred many high-quality studies characterizing country-specific prevalence, risk factors, physical and behavioral health complications, and optimal methods of assessment and counseling for youth vaping. Clinicians remain underexposed to this recent work, limiting translation of evidence into higher quality patient care. This review aims to provide pediatricians and other clinicians working with youth a clinically focused survey of key research findings and considerations based on recent evidence. This narrative review surveys emerging trends in EC use across different countries, reasons for youth vaping, characteristics of vaping materials that promote youth use, associations with combustible cigarette use, relation with cannabis and other illicit substances, physical and behavioral health risks associated with vaping, and methods of assessment, counseling, and intervention for problematic vaping in youth. Since vaping remains a relatively new phenomenon, long-term health consequences remain unknown.Conclusion: Youth vaping is an increasingly well-studied phenomenon with both physical and behavioral health risks. Pediatricians and other youth-focused clinicians can apply the lessons of recent research in work with youth and their families. What is Known: • Youth vaping is an increasingly prevalent public health concern. • Recent research demonstrates physical and behavioral health risks associated with vaping as well as methods for assessment, counseling, and intervention. What is New: • The current review summarizes the latest evidence in a clinically focused framework to facilitate translation of emerging knowledge to practice.