SEARCH_TOPIC: Circadian rhythms
TITLE: Circadian Rhythms in Cardiovascular Function: Implications for Cardiac Diseases and Therapeutic Opportunities.
PMID: 37986555
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37986555/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Circadian rhythms are internal 24-h intrinsic oscillations that are present in essentially all mammalian cells and can influence numerous biological processes. Cardiac function is known to exhibit a circadian rhythm and is strongly affected by the day/night cycle. Many cardiovascular variables, including heart rate, heart rate variability (HRV), electrocardiogram (ECG) waveforms, endothelial cell function, and blood pressure, demonstrate robust circadian rhythms. Many experiential and clinical studies have highlighted that disruptions in circadian rhythms can ultimately lead to maladaptive cardiac function. Factors that disrupt the circadian rhythm, including shift work, global travel, and sleep disorders, may consequently enhance the risk of cardiovascular diseases. Some cardiac diseases appear to occur at particular times of the day or night; therefore, targeting the disease at particular times of day may improve the clinical outcome. The objective of this review is to unravel the relationship between circadian rhythms and cardiovascular health. By understanding this intricate interplay, we aim to reveal the potential risks of circadian disruption and discuss the emerging therapeutic strategies, specifically those targeting circadian rhythms. In this review, we explore the important role of circadian rhythms in cardiovascular physiology and highlight the role they play in cardiac dysfunction such as ventricular hypertrophy, arrhythmia, diabetes, and myocardial infarction. Finally, we review potential translational treatments aimed at circadian rhythms. These treatments offer an innovative approach to enhancing the existing approaches for managing and treating heart-related conditions, while also opening new avenues for therapeutic development.