SEARCH_TOPIC: Protein intake
TITLE: Impact of habituated dietary protein intake on fasting and postprandial whole-body protein turnover and splanchnic amino acid metabolism in elderly men: a randomized, controlled, crossover trial.
PMID: 32710741
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32710741/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Efficacy of protein absorption and subsequent amino acid utilization may be reduced in the elderly. Higher protein intakes have been suggested to counteract this. We aimed to elucidate how habituated amounts of protein intake affect the fasted state of, and the stimulatory effect of a protein-rich meal on, protein absorption, whole-body protein turnover, and splanchnic amino acid metabolism. Twelve men (65-70 y) were included in a double-blinded crossover intervention study, consisting of a 20-d habituation period to a protein intake at the RDA or a high amount [1.1 g · kg lean body mass (LBM)-1 · d-1 or >2.1 g · kg LBM-1 · d-1, respectively], each followed by an experimental trial with a primed, constant infusion of D8-phenylalanine and D2-tyrosine. Arterial and hepatic venous blood samples were obtained after an overnight fast and repeatedly 4 h after a standardized meal including intrinsically labeled whey protein concentrate and calcium-caseinate proteins. Blood was analyzed for amino acid concentrations and phenylalanine and tyrosine tracer enrichments from which whole-body and splanchnic amino acid and protein kinetics were calculated. High (compared with the recommended amount of) protein intake resulted in a higher fasting whole-body protein turnover with a resultant mean ± SEM 0.03 ± 0.01 μmol · kg LBM-1 · min-1 lower net balance (P < 0.05), which was not rescued by the intake of a protein-dense meal. The mean ± SEM plasma protein fractional synthesis rate was 0.13 ± 0.06%/h lower (P < 0.05) after habituation to high protein. Furthermore, higher fasting and postprandial amino acid removal were observed after habituation to high protein, yielding higher urea excretion and increased phenylalanine oxidation rates (P < 0.01). Three weeks of habituation to high protein intake (>2.1 g protein · kg LBM-1 · d-1) led to a significantly higher net protein loss in the fasted state. This was not compensated for in the 4-h postprandial period after intake of a meal high in protein.This trial was registered at clinicaltrials.gov as NCT02587156.