SEARCH_TOPIC: Vaccination schedules
TITLE: Pneumococcal conjugate vaccination schedules in infants-acquisition, immunogenicity, and pneumococcal conjugate and yellow fever vaccine co-administration study.
PMID: 35033180
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35033180/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Pneumococcal conjugate vaccines (PCVs) effectively prevent pneumococcal disease, but the global impact of pneumococcal vaccination is hampered by its cost. The evaluation of reduced dose schedules of PCV includes measurement of effects on immunogenicity and carriage acquisition compared to standard schedules. The relevance and feasibility of trials of reduced dose schedules is greatest in middle- and low-income countries, such as The Gambia, where the introduction of PCV resulted in good disease control but where transmission of vaccine-type pneumococci persists. We designed a large cluster-randomised field trial of an alternative reduced dose schedule of PCV compared to the standard schedule, the PVS trial. We will also conduct a sub-study to evaluate the individual-level effect of the two schedules on carriage acquisition, immunogenicity, and co-administration of PCV with yellow fever vaccine, the PVS-AcqImm trial. PVS-AcqImm is a prospective, cluster-randomised trial of one dose of PCV scheduled at age 6 weeks with a booster dose at age 9 months (i.e. alternative '1+1' schedule) compared to three primary doses scheduled at 6, 10, and 14 weeks of age (i.e. standard '3+0' schedule). Sub-groups within the alternative schedule group will receive yellow fever vaccine separately or co-administered with PCV at 9 months of age. The primary endpoints are (a) rate of nasopharyngeal vaccine-type pneumococcal acquisition from 9 to 14 months of age, (b) geometric mean concentration of vaccine-type pneumococcal IgG at 18 months of age, and (c) proportions with yellow fever neutralising antibody titre ≥8 four weeks after administration of yellow fever vaccine. Participants and field staff will not be masked to group allocation while the measurement of laboratory endpoints will be masked. Approximately equal numbers of participants will be resident in each of 28 geographic clusters (14 clusters in alternative and standard schedule groups); 784 enrolled for acquisition measurements and 336 for immunogenicity measurements. Analysis will account for potential non-independence of measurements by cluster and so interpretation of effects will be at the individual level (i.e. a population of individuals). PVS-AcqImm will evaluate whether acquisition of vaccine-type pneumococci is reduced by the alternative compared to the standard schedule, which is required if the alternative schedule is to be effective. Likewise, evidence of superior immune response at 18 months of age and safety of PCV co-administration with yellow fever vaccine will support decision-making regarding the use of the alternative 1+1 schedule. Acquisition and immunogenicity outcomes will be essential for the interpretation of the results of the large field trial comparing the two schedules. International Standard Randomised Controlled Trial Number 72821613 .