SEARCH_TOPIC: Antipsychotics
TITLE: Antipsychotic Drugs: A Concise Review of History, Classification, Indications, Mechanism, Efficacy, Side Effects, Dosing, and Clinical Application.
PMID: 39350614
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39350614/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The introduction of the first antipsychotic drug, chlorpromazine, was a milestone for psychiatry. The authors review the history, classification, indications, mechanism, efficacy, side effects, dosing, drug initiation, switching, and other practical issues and questions related to antipsychotics. Classifications such as first-generation/typical versus second-generation/atypical antipsychotics are neither valid nor useful; these agents should be described according to the Neuroscience-based Nomenclature (NbN). Antipsychotic drugs are not specific for treating schizophrenia. They reduce psychosis regardless of the underlying diagnosis, and they go beyond nonspecific sedation. All currently available antipsychotic drugs are dopamine blockers or dopamine partial agonists. In schizophrenia, effect sizes for relapse prevention are larger than for acute treatment. A major unresolved problem is the implausible increase in placebo response in antipsychotic drug trials over the decades. Differences in side effects, which can be objectively measured, such as weight gain, are less equivocal than differences in rating-scale-measured (subjective) efficacy. The criteria for choosing among antipsychotics are mainly pragmatic and include factors such as available formulations, metabolism, half-life, efficacy, and side effects in previous illness episodes. Plasma levels help to detect nonadherence, and once-daily dosing at night (which is possible with many antipsychotics) and long-acting injectable formulations are useful when adherence is a problem. Dose-response curves for both acute treatment and relapse prevention follow a hyperbolic pattern, with maximally efficacious average dosages for schizophrenia of around 5 mg/day risperidone equivalents. Computer apps facilitating the choice between drugs are available. Future drug development should include pharmacogenetics and focus on drugs for specific aspects of psychosis.