SEARCH_TOPIC: Sexual health
TITLE: Sexual health after vaginoplasty: A systematic review.
PMID: 33882193
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33882193/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Vaginoplasty is a gender-affirming procedure for transgender and gender diverse (TGD) patients who experience gender incongruence. This procedure reduces mental health concerns and enhances patients' quality of life. A systematic review investigating the sexual health outcomes of vaginoplasty has not been performed. To investigate sexual health after gender-affirming vaginoplasty for TGD patients. MEDLINE/PubMed, Embase, Scopus, and PsycINFO databases were searched, unrestricted by dates or study design. We included primary literature that incorporated TGD patients, reported sexual health outcomes after vaginoplasty intervention and were available in English. Outcomes included at least one of these sexual health parameters: sexual desire, arousal, sensation, activity, secretions, satisfaction, pleasure, orgasm, interferences, or aids. Our search yielded 140 studies with 12 different vaginoplasty surgical techniques and 6,953 patients. The majority of these studies were cross-section or retrospective cohort observational studies (66%). 17.4%-100% (median 79.7%) of patients (n = 2,384) were able to orgasm postoperatively regardless of revision or primary vaginoplasty techniques. Female Sexual Function Index was the most used standardized questionnaire (17 studies, ranging from 16.9 to 28.6). 64%-98% (median 81%) of patients were satisfied with their general sexual satisfaction. The most common interference of sexual activity was dyspareunia. The heterogenous methods of measuring sexual outcomes reflect the difficulty in comparing single-center surgical outcomes, encouraging the need for a standardized and validated metric for reporting sexual health after vaginoplasty for TGD patients. The most common sexual health parameter reported is sexual activity while therapeutic aids and pleasure were the least reported parameters. Future studies are needed to improve and expand methods of measuring sexual health, including prospective studies, validated questionnaires, and inclusive metrics. Systematic review registration number: PROSPERO 01/01/2021: CRD42021224014.