SEARCH_TOPIC: Flu shot
TITLE: Advancing influenza vaccines: A review of next-generation candidates and their potential for global health impact.
PMID: 39369576
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39369576/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Influenza vaccines are an essential tool for influenza prevention, control and preparedness. However, demand for them and their programmatic suitability globally is significantly influenced by their variable effectiveness against influenza illness annually, limited duration of protection and need for yearly updating and vaccination. As such, the World Health Organization and major funders, such as the United States National Institute of Allergy and Infectious Diseases and Bill and Melinda Gates Foundation, have strongly encouraged developing influenza vaccines with increased efficacy, breadth and duration of protection. Here, we review the next-generation influenza vaccine pipeline, focusing on products in clinical development, and compare their characteristics to currently approved seasonal influenza vaccines. To identify and characterize next-generation influenza vaccine candidates, we conducted a comprehensive literature review, using the CIDRAP Universal Influenza Vaccine Technology Landscape as a primary reference source and extracting additional information from peer-reviewed manuscripts, clinical trial records and other media in the public domain. Our analysis reveals a robust clinical development pipeline for next-generation influenza vaccines, featuring a diversity of approaches to address existing vaccine challenges and several candidates in advanced stages of development. mRNA vaccines emerged as a predominant platform, as evidenced by the number of candidates focused on improved seasonal protection as well as combination vaccine candidates targeting additional respiratory viruses. While still early in development, results from universal or broadly protective products are promising and warrant continued investment from funders. As most Phase 3 candidates are mRNA-based and include combination vaccines, it is critical to begin considering how these new products may become integrated into the current global influenza vaccine strain selection and manufacturing ecosystems, and existing immunization programmes.