SEARCH_TOPIC: IBS
TITLE: A randomized, double-blinded, placebo-controlled clinical trial on Lactobacillus-containing cultured milk drink as adjuvant therapy for depression in irritable bowel syndrome.
PMID: 38658619
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38658619/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Irritable bowel syndrome (IBS) is frequently linked with coexisting mental illnesses. Our previous study discovered that 32.1% of IBS patients had subthreshold depression (SD), placing them at higher risk of developing major depression. Gut microbiota modulation through psychobiotics was found to influence depression via the gut-brain axis. However, the efficacy of lessening depression among IBS patients remains ambiguous. The study's aim was to investigate the roles of cultured milk drinks containing 10<sup>9</sup> cfu Lactobacillus acidophilus LA-5 and Lactobacillus paracasei L. CASEI-01 on depression and related variables among IBS participants with SD. A total of 110 IBS participants with normal mood (NM) and SD, were randomly assigned to one of four intervention groups: IBS-NM with placebo, IBS-NM with probiotic, IBS-SD with placebo, and IBS-SD with probiotic. Each participant was required to consume two bottles of cultured milk every day for a duration of 12 weeks. The following outcomes were assessed: depression risk, quality of life, the severity of IBS, and hormonal changes. The depression scores were significantly reduced in IBS-SD with probiotic and placebo from baseline (p < 0.001). Only IBS-SD with probiotic showed a significant rise in serotonin serum levels (p < 0.05). A significantly higher life quality measures were seen in IBS-SD with probiotic, IBS-SD with placebo, and IBS-NM with placebo (p < 0.05). All groups, both placebo and probiotic, reported significant improvement in IBS severity post-intervention with a higher prevalence of remission and mild IBS (p < 0.05). Dual strains lactobacillus-containing cultured milk drink via its regulation of relevant biomarkers, is a potential anti-depressive prophylactic agent for IBS patients at risk.