SEARCH_TOPIC: Occupational therapy
TITLE: The Occupational Therapy Profession in Saudi Arabia.
PMID: 38274406
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38274406/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
To provide an evidence-based description of how the occupational therapy profession operates in Saudi Arabia. A case study methodology set out an evidence-based description of occupational therapy in Saudi Arabia. Three procedures were used: (1) a structured narrative review of publications on occupational therapy in Saudi Arabia based on searches of seven healthcare databases; (2) an audit of "grey literature" about or referring to occupational therapy education, practice, research, or the profession in Saudi Arabia using Google Scholar, Google search, official documents and websites, and relevant global organisation such as the WFOT website and documents; and (3) consultation with occupational therapists to further discuss emerging evidence from peer-reviewed articles and grey literature about occupational therapy in Saudi Arabia. Data were collected in Arabic and English. <i>Findings</i>. Occupational therapy in Saudi Arabia is a rapidly growing and emerging profession primarily focused on rehabilitation practice. Between 2010 and 2019, seven academic organisations commenced bachelor's degree programmes. Occupational therapy services in Saudi Arabia are concentrated in city-based secondary and tertiary healthcare services targeting rehabilitation and disability support. The practice aims to promote the reduction in impairment and increase activity performance and participation in valued life roles. Despite the increasing demand for occupational therapy services, there needs to be more access to and availability of their services. Enhancement of the awareness of occupational therapy among the public and other healthcare professionals is needed. A consistent definition of occupational therapy in Saudi Arabia would strengthen the profession, along with a national scope of practice, practice guidelines, increased workforce and development, and professional education information. Occupational therapy in Saudi Arabia is growing regarding the size of the workforce and the number of programmes and services provided, thus contributing to the health and well-being of the population primarily through rehabilitation. Further development of the profession is necessary.