SEARCH_TOPIC: Glaucoma
TITLE: Knowledge about glaucoma among adults in Africa: a systematic review.
PMID: 38355482
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38355482/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Africa is one of the continents with a substantial burden of glaucoma, where it is approximately twice as common as it is worldwide. If left untreated, glaucoma can cause blindness and permanent vision loss if it is not addressed promptly. Good knowledge is essential for preventing glaucoma's irreversible blindness and ocular damage. However, no systematic review has been done to report the pooled percentage of adults in Africa who have good knowledge about glaucoma. This study aimed to estimate the level of knowledge about glaucoma in Africa and its determinants. The study followed the PRISMA guidelines for systematic review. Seven electronic databases which include PubMed/MEDLINE, Web of Science, PROQUEST (PQDT), CINAHL (EBSCO), Google Scholar, African Journal Online, and WHO HINARI databases were searched from January 1, 2013, to July 31, 2023for studies conducted with a focus on the knowledge about glaucoma among adults in Africa. The quality of the final articles was assessed using the Joanna Briggs Institute quality assessment tool for cross-sectional studies. In the present systematic review, 2781 articles were initially identified and evaluated. Of these, eight studies that met the inclusion criteria were included in the final analysis. In this review, the proportion of knowledge about glaucoma among adults in Africa was low. Educational status, family history of glaucoma, occupation, being a male, and having a history of eye examination were the main determinants of good knowledge about glaucoma among adults in Africa. The systematic review found that only a few had good knowledge about glaucoma. Education campaigns and eye exam promotions are recommended to enhance awareness. This systematic review was registered on 30/07/2023 with PROSPERO ID: CRD42023430723.