SEARCH_TOPIC: Sexual health
TITLE: Military Sexual Trauma and Sexual Health in Women Veterans: A Systematic Review.
PMID: 31029620
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31029620/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Sexual trauma during military service is prevalent among women veterans and is associated with multiple negative physical and mental health sequelae. The high prevalence of military sexual trauma (MST), sexual harassment and assault during military service, has prompted the Veterans Health Administration to enact several policies to address the detrimental health impacts of this experience. MST also negatively impacts veterans' sexual health, yet the field lacks a systematic review of the relationship between MST and sexual health among women veterans. To systematically review the existing research on the impact of MST on sexual health in women veterans. The published literature examining MST and sexual health in women veterans prior to July 19, 2018, was reviewed according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses guidelines for systematic reviews. Articles were abstracted and evaluated for risk of bias. 6 articles were identified that met inclusion criteria; they generally evidenced a low risk of bias and thus a high quality of evidence. Results indicated that MST is associated with sexual dysfunction and low sexual satisfaction among women veterans. Other mental health concerns were also commonly comorbid with female sexual dysfunction in this population. This body of literature is small and methodologically limited by over-reliance on observational study design, use of non-validated and single-item measures of sexual health, and failure to comprehensively assess trauma history, including sexual and non-sexual trauma. Sexual dysfunction is a salient health issue for women veterans who experienced MST. Additional research is needed with improved designs, validated measures of sexual function, and comprehensive assessment of trauma to learn about the specific impact of MST on women veterans' sexual health. We present recommendations for future directions in terms of research, clinical practice, education, and policy. Pulverman CS, Christy AY, Kelly UA. Military Sexual Trauma and Sexual Health in Women Veterans: A Systematic Review. Sex Med Rev 2019;7:393-407.