SEARCH_TOPIC: Endoscopy
TITLE: Surveillance Endoscopy in Pediatric Esophageal Atresia: Toward an Evidence-Based Algorithm.
PMID: 38078620
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38078620/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Individuals with esophageal atresia (EA) have lifelong increased risk for mucosal and structural pathology of the esophagus. The use of surveillance endoscopy to detect clinically meaningful pathology has been underexplored in pediatric EA. We hypothesized that surveillance endoscopy in pediatric EA has high clinical yield, even in the absence of symptoms. The medical records of all patients with EA who underwent at least 1 surveillance endoscopy between March 2004 and March 2023 at an international EA referral center were retrospectively reviewed. The primary outcomes were endoscopic identification of pathology leading to an escalation in medical, endoscopic, or surgical management. Logistic regression analysis examined predictors of actionable findings. Nelson-Aalen analysis estimated optimal endoscopic surveillance intervals. Five hundred forty-six children with EA underwent 1,473 surveillance endoscopies spanning 3,687 person-years of follow-up time. A total of 770 endoscopies (52.2%) in 394 unique patients (72.2%) had actionable pathology. Esophagitis leading to escalation of therapy was the most frequently encountered finding (484 endoscopies, 32.9%), with most esophagitis attributed to acid reflux. Barrett's esophagus (intestinal metaplasia) was identified in 7 unique patients (1.3%) at a median age of 11.3 years. No dysplastic lesions were identified. Actionable findings leading to surgical intervention were found in 55 children (30 refractory reflux and 25 tracheoesophageal fistulas). Significant predictors of actionable pathology included increasing age, long gap atresia, and hiatal hernia. Symptoms were not predictive of actionable findings, except dysphagia, which was associated with stricture. Nelson-Aalen analysis predicted occurrence of an actionable finding every 5 years. Surveillance endoscopy uncovers high rates of actionable pathology even in asymptomatic children with EA. Based on the findings of the current study, a pediatric EA surveillance endoscopy algorithm is proposed.