SEARCH_TOPIC: Emotional intelligence
TITLE: Reevaluating Core Elements of Emotional Intelligence in Professional Identity Formation for Inclusion in Pharmacy Education.
PMID: 37316129
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37316129/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The objectives of this review are to (1) analyze the core concepts of emotional intelligence self-perception, self-expression, interpersonal relationships, decision-making skills, and stress management and their role in professional identity formation, and (2) investigate the methods and strategies to incorporate emotional intelligence in pharmacy education. A literature review of emotional intelligence in health care education was conducted by searching the electronic databases PubMed, Google Scholar, ProQuest, and ERIC. The following search terms were included: emotional intelligence, emotional quotient, in association with professional identity formation, pharmacy curriculum, pharmacy cocurriculum, entrustable professional activities, medicine, and nursing. Only full-length, free-access, English-text articles were included. Twenty articles addressed the inclusion and/or assessment of core elements of emotional intelligence in pharmacy education. Commonly taught, cultivated, and assessed core elements include self-awareness, empathy, and interdisciplinary relationships. Assessment tools used to evaluate emotional intelligence in pharmacy education are subjective, qualitative, and semiquantitative, and may include pre and postcourse surveys, event surveys, and questionnaires. The pharmacy literature is scarce on how best to analyze emotional intelligence and the role it plays in the pharmacist's education and practice. A comprehensive integration of emotional intelligence into the pharmacy curriculum is a challenging task and requires additional in-depth discussions on how best to incorporate it in the pharmacist's professional identity formation. The Academy will benefit from re-engaging its constituents in addressing the gaps of emotional intelligence in the professional curriculum in preparation for the Accreditation Council for Pharmacy Education 2025 standards.