SEARCH_TOPIC: Emergency room triage
TITLE: Optimizing triage education for emergency room nurses: A scoping review.
PMID: 39405995
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39405995/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Accurate triage decisions by emergency room nurses are pivotal for patient prognosis and efficient utilization of resources. This study aimed to identify teaching methods, contents, intervention characteristics, and initial consideration of educational design for the development of triage education, targeting triage nurses. A scoping review. PubMed, CINAHL, Web of Science, Embase, and RISS were searched for studies in either English or Korean, regardless of publication year. The review was conducted according to the Joanna Briggs Institute guidelines. Studies published before November 15, 2023 were selected, based on the following index terms in each database: nurses, triage, education, and emergency services, hospital. Of the 20 studies included in this review, five focused on severity classification of patients with cardiovascular diseases, one addressed infectious diseases, two examined pediatric patients, one explored patients with trauma, and the remaining eleven were not limited to specific diseases. Eleven studies (55 %) employed face-to-face (offline) education, whereas six (30 %) used non-face-to-face (online) education. The teaching methods were classified as teacher-centered learning and student-centered learning. The educational strategies included in-person lectures, online classes, demonstrations, simulations, mobile technology or web-based programs, group discussions, role-plays, and flipped learning. Outcome variables, such as triage accuracy, knowledge, performance ability, self-efficacy, satisfaction, wait time, and competency were measured as intervention effects. This review demonstrates the key characteristics and contents of triage education interventions, along with key considerations in the initial design stages. Triage education covers a wide range of contents and diverse teaching methods pertinent to severity classification in triage practice. Effective educational programs hinge on the meticulous planning of objectives, optimal selection of the target population, needs assessment, and suitable teaching methods and materials. Future triage education for emergency room nurses should be tailored to specific participants while anticipating and planning all potential circumstances of implementation.