SEARCH_TOPIC: Tubal ligation
TITLE: Salpingectomy vs tubal ligation for sterilization: a systematic review and meta-analysis.
PMID: 32941790
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32941790/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
After strong evidence and major organizations recommending salpingectomy over tubal ligation, we sought to perform a systematic review and meta-analysis comparing the intraoperative attributes and complication rates associated with these 2 procedures. We searched PubMed, the Cochrane Library, Embase, and clinical trials registries without time or language restrictions. The search was conducted in February 2020. Database searches revealed 74 potential studies, of which 11 were examined at the full-text level. Of these, 6 studies were included in the qualitative analysis and 5 studies were included in the meta-analysis. We included randomized controlled trials comparing salpingectomy with tubal ligation in women seeking sterilization. We included studies that also had at least 1 outcome listed in the population/patient problem, intervention, comparison, outcome, and time. Articles were excluded if they did not meet the inclusion criteria or if data were not reported and the authors did not respond to inquiries. Abstracts and full-text articles were assessed by 2 authors independently using the blinded coding assignment function or EPPI-Reviewer 4. Conflicting selections were resolved by consensus. The quality of included studies was determined using the Cochrane Collaboration tool for assessing the risk of bias in randomized trials. Two authors independently assessed the risk of bias for each study; disagreements were resolved by consensus. There were few differences between the procedures, with no differences in most important clinical outcomes (antimüllerian hormone, blood loss, length of hospital stay, pre- or postoperative complications, or wound infections). A single study reported a reduced rate of pregnancies with salpingectomy (risk ratio, 0.22; 95% confidence interval, 0.05-1.02), but this did not reach statistical significance (P=.05). We conclude from these data that salpingectomy is as safe and efficacious as tubal ligation for sterilization and may be preferred, where appropriate, to reduce the risk of ovarian cancer.