SEARCH_TOPIC: Macronutrients
TITLE: Micro- and Macronutrients in Endometrial Cancer-From Metallomic Analysis to Improvements in Treatment Strategies.
PMID: 39337406
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39337406/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Endometrial cancer is reported to be one of the most prevalent cancers of the female reproductive organs worldwide, with increasing incidence and mortality rates over the past decade. Early diagnosis is critical for effective treatment. Recently, there has been a growing focus on the role of nutrition and micronutrient and macronutrient status in patients with gynecologic cancers, including endometrial cancer. In the following paper, we have conducted an in-depth narrative literature review with the aim of evaluating the results of metallomic studies specifically concerning the micro- and macronutrient status of patients with endometrial cancer. The main objective of the paper was to analyze the results regarding the nutritional status of endometrial cancer patients and describe the role of chosen elements in the onset and progression of endometrial carcinogenesis. Further, we have focused on the evaluation of the usage of the described elements in the potential treatment of the abovementioned cancer, as well as the possible prevention of cancer considering proper supplementation of chosen elements in healthy individuals. Calcium supplementation has been proposed to reduce the risk of endometrial cancer, although some studies offer conflicting evidence. Deficiencies in phosphorus, selenium, and zinc have been inversely associated with endometrial cancer risk, suggesting they may play a protective role, whereas excessive levels of iron, copper, and cadmium have been positively correlated with increased risk. However, the molecular mechanisms by which these elements affect endometrial carcinogenesis are not fully understood, and current findings are often contradictory. Further research is needed to clarify these relationships and to evaluate the potential of nutritional interventions for the prevention and treatment of endometrial cancer.