SEARCH_TOPIC: Hormones types
TITLE: Organoid co-culture model of the human endometrium in a fully synthetic extracellular matrix enables the study of epithelial-stromal crosstalk.
PMID: 37572651
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37572651/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The human endometrium undergoes recurring cycles of growth, differentiation, and breakdown in response to sex hormones. Dysregulation of epithelial-stromal communication during hormone-mediated signaling may be linked to myriad gynecological disorders for which treatments remain inadequate. Here, we describe a completely defined, synthetic extracellular matrix that enables co-culture of human endometrial epithelial and stromal cells in a manner that captures healthy and disease states across a simulated menstrual cycle. We parsed cycle-dependent endometrial integrin expression and matrix composition to define candidate cell-matrix interaction cues for inclusion in a polyethylene glycol (PEG)-based hydrogel crosslinked with matrix metalloproteinase-labile peptides. We semi-empirically screened a parameter space of biophysical and molecular features representative of the endometrium to define compositions suitable for hormone-driven expansion and differentiation of epithelial organoids, stromal cells, and co-cultures of the two cell types. Each cell type exhibited characteristic morphological and molecular responses to hormone changes when co-encapsulated in hydrogels tuned to a stiffness regime similar to the native tissue and functionalized with a collagen-derived adhesion peptide (GFOGER) and a fibronectin-derived peptide (PHSRN-K-RGD). Analysis of cell-cell crosstalk during interleukin 1B (IL1B)-induced inflammation revealed dysregulation of epithelial proliferation mediated by stromal cells. Altogether, we demonstrate the development of a fully synthetic matrix to sustain the dynamic changes of the endometrial microenvironment and support its applications to understand menstrual health and endometriotic diseases. This work was supported by The John and Karine Begg Foundation, the Manton Foundation, and NIH U01 (EB029132).