SEARCH_TOPIC: Pneumonia
TITLE: Bacterial pneumonia in kidney transplant recipients.
PMID: 29605219
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/29605219/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Bacterial pathogens are the most frequent cause of pneumonia after transplantation. Early after transplantation, recipients are at higher risk for nosocomial infections. The most commonly encountered pathogens during this period are gram-negative bacilli (Klebsiella pneumoniae, Escherichia coli, Pseudomonas aeruginosa …), but gram-positive coccus such as Staphylococcus aureus or Streptococcus pneumoniae and anaerobic bacteria can also be found. Empirical antibiotic therapy should be guided by previous colonisation of the recipient and bacterial resistance pattern in the hospital. Six months after transplantation, pneumonias are mostly due to community-acquired bacteria (S. pneumonia, H. influenza, Mycoplasma, Chlamydia and others). Opportunistic pathogens take advantage of the state of immunosuppression which is usually highest from one to six months after transplantation. During this period, but also occurring many years later in the setting of a chronically depressed immune system, bacterial pathogens with low intrinsic virulence can cause pneumonia. The diagnosis of pneumonia caused by opportunistic pathogens can be challenging. The delay in diagnosis preventing the early instauration of adequate treatment in kidney transplant recipients with a depressed immune system, frequently coupled with co-morbid conditions and a state of frailty, will affect prognosis and outcome, increasing morbidity and mortality. This review will focus on the most common opportunistic bacterial pathogens causing pneumonia in kidney transplant recipients: Legionella, Nocardia, Mycobacterium tuberculosis/nontuberculous, and Rhodococcus. Recognition of their specificities in the setting of immunosuppression will allow early diagnosis, crucial for initiation of effective therapy and successful outcome. Interactions with immunosuppressive therapy should be considered as well as reducing immunosuppression if necessary.