SEARCH_TOPIC: Anticoagulants
TITLE: Botulinum Toxin Injection and Electromyography in Patients Receiving Anticoagulants: A Systematic Review.
PMID: 32896110
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/32896110/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
To identify the different practice patterns of botulinum toxin injection (BTX) and electromyography (EMG) in patients receiving anticoagulation and to evaluate the incidence, reporting, and management of bleeding complications and compartment syndrome from BTX and EMG. Systematic review of relevant clinical studies in PubMed/Medline and Embase databases using key terms from inception to 31 May 2020. All publications in the English language were included without demographic limits. A comprehensive search was performed to identify all studies addressing BTX and EMG in patients receiving anticoagulants. Two reviewers independently screened the titles, abstracts, and full texts and extracted data based on a set of predefined inclusion and exclusion criteria. All studies that met the inclusion criteria were assigned their respective levels of evidence using the Joanne Briggs Institute (JBI) Level of Evidence for Effectiveness. Eighteen studies were included in this review of which there were nine studies each on BTX and EMG. The results indicated heterogeneity in the practice patterns of BTX and EMG in patients taking anticoagulants. These included the decision for continuation of anticoagulant, international normalized ratio (INR) results acceptable to practitioners, the modality for procedure guidance, and surveillance of bleeding complications. In addition, there were variations in the description of targeted muscles and description of needle sizes. The overall incidence of bleeding complications and compartment syndrome rates were low. Despite the varied practice in anticoagulated patients undergoing BTX or EMG, practitioners should allow periprocedural continuation of anticoagulants, targeting an INR of 2 to 3 while using the smallest needle (25 gauge or smaller) of appropriate length. Some of the evidence on procedural guidance and complication surveillance were weak and more research in these areas is required.