SEARCH_TOPIC: Gene expression
TITLE: Overview of gene expression techniques with an emphasis on vitamin D related studies.
PMID: 36537177
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36537177/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Each cell controls when and how its genes must be expressed for proper function. Every function in a cell is driven by signaling molecules through various regulatory cascades. Different cells in a multicellular organism may express very different sets of genes, even though they contain the same DNA. The set of genes expressed in a cell determines the set of proteins and functional RNAs it contains, giving it its unique properties. Malfunction in gene expression harms the cell and can lead to the development of various disease conditions. The use of rapid high-throughput gene expression profiling unravels the complexity of human disease at various levels. Peripheral blood mononuclear cells (PBMC) have been used frequently to understand gene expression homeostasis in various disease conditions. However, more studies are required to validate whether PBMC gene expression patterns accurately reflect the expression of other cells or tissues. Vitamin D, which is responsible for a multitude of health consequences, is also an immune modulatory hormone with major biological activities in the innate and adaptive immune systems. Vitamin D exerts its diverse biological effects in target tissues by regulating gene expression and its deficiency, is recognized as a public health problem worldwide. Understanding the genetic factors that affect vitamin D has the potential benefit that it will make it easier to identify individuals who require supplementation. Different technological advances in gene expression can be used to identify and assess the severity of disease and aid in the development of novel therapeutic interventions. This review focuses on different gene expression approaches and various clinical studies of vitamin D to investigate the role of gene expression in identifying the molecular signature of the disease.