SEARCH_TOPIC: Angioplasty
TITLE: Sphygmomanometer-induced hemostasis following iatrogenic guidewire perforation during lower extremity angioplasty.
PMID: 34037487
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34037487/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Iatrogenic guidewire perforation is a well-known complication of lower extremity angioplasty that is often benign or can be easily treated with endovascular techniques. However, perforations that occur in arterial side branches may be more challenging to manage. If bleeding persists, open surgery and fasciotomy may be required to evacuate the resulting hematoma and prevent compartment syndrome. These subsequent procedures increase morbidity and, if the angioplasty was performed in the outpatient setting, necessitate patient transfer to a hospital. To address these challenges, we describe a non-invasive hemostasis technique involving serial sphygmomanometer cuff inflations over the affected site in a series of five patients who experienced this complication at our office. We retrospectively reviewed the medical records of consecutive patients undergoing lower extremity angioplasty that were found to have an arterial guidewire perforation on completion angiogram at our outpatient center between February 2012 and February 2017. Patients found to have iatrogenic guidewire perforations were administered intravenous protamine sulfate and were transferred to the surgical recovery room. Patients received ibuprofen or acetaminophen for pain management. A blood pressure cuff was placed around the site of perforation, and patients received serial cuff inflation cycles with repeated examinations of both limbs until patients reported cessation of pain and there were no signs of a developing hematoma. Patients were observed for two hours before they were discharged home. A follow-up duplex ultrasound examination was completed within one week of the intervention. Over the course of five years, 536 angioplasties were performed at our outpatient office. Five of these patients experienced iatrogenic guidewire perforation (0.93%). Perforations occurred in branches of the anterior or posterior tibial artery. All of these patients were successfully managed with the aforementioned hemostasis technique. None of these patients required transfer to a hospital for further management, and no complications were reported at follow-up. Complications of iatrogenic guidewire perforations in lower extremity arterial side branches can be safely and effectively managed by applying external compression around the affected site with an automatic blood pressure cuff.