SEARCH_TOPIC: Rest and recovery
TITLE: Effect of rest duration between sets on fatigue and recovery after short intense plyometric exercise.
PMID: 38956280
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38956280/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Plyometric training is characterized by high-intensity exercise which is performed in short term efforts divided into sets. The purpose of the present study was twofold: first, to investigate the effects of three distinct plyometric exercise protocols, each with varying work-to-rest ratios, on muscle fatigue and recovery using an incline-plane training machine; and second, to assess the relationship between changes in lower limb muscle strength and power and the biochemical response to the three exercise variants employed. Forty-five adult males were randomly divided into 3 groups (n = 15) performing an exercise of 60 rebounds on an incline-plane training machine. The G0 group performed continuous exercise, while the G45 and G90 groups completed 4 sets of 15 repetitions, each set lasting 45 s with 45 s rest in G45 (work-to-rest ratio of 1:1) and 90 s rest in G90 (1:2 ratio). Changes in muscle torques of knee extensors and flexors, as well as blood lactate (LA) and ammonia levels, were assessed before and every 5 min for 30 min after completing the workout. The results showed significantly higher (p < 0.001) average power across all jumps generated during intermittent compared to continuous exercise. The greatest decrease in knee extensor strength immediately post-exercise was recorded in group G0 and the least in G90. The post-exercise time course of LA changes followed a similar pattern in all groups, while the longer the interval between sets, the faster LA returned to baseline. Intermittent exercise had a more favourable effect on muscle energy metabolism and recovery than continuous exercise, and the work-to-rest ratio of 1:2 in plyometric exercises was sufficient rest time to allow the continuation of exercise in subsequent sets at similar intensity.