SEARCH_TOPIC: Nutritional supplements
TITLE: Nutritional Supplements in the Clinical Management of Tendinopathy: A Scoping Review.
PMID: 37146985
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37146985/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Tendinopathy has a high prevalence and incidence in the general population and among athletes, with a lack of consensus among medical practitioners on optimal management strategies. The objective of this scoping review was to evaluate current research on the use of nutritional supplements for treating tendinopathies, including what supplements have been used and what outcomes, outcome measures, and intervention parameters have been reported. Databases searched included Embase, SPORTDiscus, the Cochrane Library, MEDLINE, CINAHL, and AMED. This scoping review considered primary studies investigating nutritional supplements for tendinopathies and was reported in accordance with the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis Extension for Scoping Reviews. A total of 1527 articles were identified with 16 included in the review. Studies investigated a range of nutritional supplements in the clinical management of various tendinopathies, including several commercially available proprietary blends of several ingredients. TendoActive (mucopolysaccharides, type I collagen, and vitamin C) was used in 2 studies, TENDISULFUR (methylsulfonylmethane, hydrolyzed collagen, L-arginine, L-lysine, vitamin C, bromelain, chondroitin, glucosamine, Boswellia, and myrrh) was used in 3 studies, and Tenosan (arginine-L-alpha ketoglutarate, hydrolyzed collagen type I, methylsulfonylmethane, vitamin C, bromelain, and vinitrox) was used in 2 studies. Collagen peptides were used in 2 studies, with omega-3 fatty acids, combined fatty acids and antioxidants, turmeric rhizome combined with Boswellia, β-hydroxy β-methylbutyric, vitamin C in isolation and combined with gelatin, and creatine investigated in one study each. Despite a paucity of studies to date, findings from this review suggest that several nutritional compounds may be beneficial in the clinical management of tendinopathies, by exerting anti-inflammatory effects and improving tendon healing. Nutritional supplements may have potential as an adjunctive method to standard treatment methods such as exercise, where their pain-relieving, anti-inflammatory, and structural tendon effects may augment the positive functional outcomes gained from progressive exercise rehabilitation.