SEARCH_TOPIC: Antipsychotics
TITLE: The use of antipsychotics in the treatment of catatonia: a systematic review.
PMID: 40123412
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/40123412/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Catatonia in psychotic patients presents unique challenges. While antipsychotics are the cornerstone of schizophrenia treatment, their use in catatonic patients is sometimes discouraged for fear of worsening the signs. Reports on the successful use of second-generation antipsychotics have been published. We conducted a systematic review according to the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analysis guidelines to describe the outcomes of antipsychotic-treated catatonic events. We searched Medline and Web of Science databases from 2000 to 2023 using search terms including "catatonia" and "antipsychotic agents" for all original peer-reviewed articles, including clinical trials, observational studies, and case-reports. We included antipsychotic-treated catatonic events and extracted data on patient characteristics, pharmacological context, agent involved, and treatment outcomes for each antipsychotic trial. After screening 6,219 records, 79 full-text articles were included. Among them, we identified 175 antipsychotic trials (in 110 patients). Only 41.1% of the patients benefited from a previous benzodiazepine trial. Antipsychotic use was considered beneficial in 60.0% of the trials, neutral in 29.1%, and harmful in 10.9%. Trials tended to be reported as beneficial for amisulpride, clozapine, and risperidone, equivocal for aripiprazole and olanzapine, and mostly detrimental for haloperidol and quetiapine. Psychotic disorders were the most common underlying etiology (65.8%). Antipsychotics could be an option in the treatment of catatonia in psychotic patients. However, with few exceptions, we found non-beneficial outcomes with all second-generation antipsychotics in varying proportions in this largest review to date. Although olanzapine is widely used, it is associated with mitigated reported outcomes.