SEARCH_TOPIC: IUD
TITLE: IUD self-removal: A randomized controlled trial of a self-removal guide in clinical and nonclinical settings.
PMID: 38518903
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38518903/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Intrauterine device (IUD) users often encounter barriers to desired removal. Self-removal, while previously found to be successful only 19% of the time, may mitigate these obstacles. Our primary objective was to evaluate the effectiveness of our previously developed IUD self-removal guide. Our secondary objectives were to evaluate the acceptability of the guide and characterize the self-removal process. STUDY DESIGN: This was a randomized controlled trial comparing IUD self-removal success rates with and without a guide. Participants selected a clinical or nonclinical setting for self-removal. The primary outcome was the rate of successful IUD self-removal. Covariates of interest included demographic characteristics, parity, body mass index, and attempted removal setting. Of the 116 participants, 35 (30%) successfully removed their IUDs, 20 (32%) randomized to the guide, and 15 (28%) randomized to no guide (p = 0.7). While our guide was not associated with increased successful self-removal, the majority (97%) of those randomized to it reported it to be helpful. Those who selected a nonclinical setting (80%) were more successful at self-removal (35% vs 9%, p = 0.01). Most participants would recommend IUD self-removal to a friend (68%) and attempt again with a future IUD (80%). The proportion of participants who successfully removed their IUDs was higher than previously shown, with or without the use of our guide. Our inclusion of a nonclinical setting was novel, in which the proportion of successful self-removal was significantly higher. Providers should consider discussion of IUD self-removal, with a reasonable expectation about the likelihood of success, as a means of increasing reproductive autonomy. IUD self-removal was feasible and acceptable.