SEARCH_TOPIC: Pilates benefits
TITLE: Effectiveness of Physiotherapeutic Scoliosis-Specific Exercises on 3-Dimensional Spinal Deformities in Patients With Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis: A Systematic Review and Meta-analysis.
PMID: 38719166
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38719166/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
To investigate the effects of physiotherapeutic scoliosis-specific exercises (PSSE) on coronal, horizontal, and sagittal deformities of the spine in adolescent idiopathic scoliosis (AIS) as well as how curve severity, intervention duration, and intervention type could modify these effects. Data sources included PubMed, Web of Science, Embase, Cochrane Library, and Scopus databases, which were searched from their inception to September 5, 2023. Clinical controlled trials reporting the effects of PSSE on the Cobb angle, angle of trunk rotation (ATR), thoracic kyphosis (TK), or lumbar lordosis in patients with AIS aged 10-18 years. The experimental groups received PSSE; the control groups received standard care (observation or bracing) or conventional exercise such as core stabilization exercise, Pilates, proprioceptive neuromuscular facilitation, and other nonspecific exercises. Two researchers independently extracted key information from eligible studies. The quality of the studies was assessed using the Cochrane Handbook version 5.1.0 risk of bias assessment and the JBI Center for Evidence-Based Health Care (2016) of quasi-experimental research authenticity assessment tool. The level and certainty of evidence were rated according to the Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation framework. We followed the Preferred Reporting Items for Systematic Reviews and Meta-Analyses statement. The protocol for this study was registered in PROSPERO (CRD42023404996). Twelve randomized controlled trials (RCTs) and 5 non-RCTs were meta-analyzed separately. The results indicated that compared with other nonsurgical management, PSSE significantly improved the Cobb angle, ATR, and TK, whereas the lumbar lordosis improvement was not statistically significant. Additionally, the efficacy of PSSE on Cobb angle was not significant in patients with curve severity ≥30° compared with controls. Nevertheless, the pooled effect of PSSE on Cobb angle was not significantly modified by intervention duration and intervention type and that on ATR was not significantly modified by intervention duration. The overall quality of evidence according to Grading of Recommendations, Assessment, Development, and Evaluation was moderate to low for RCT and very low for non-RCT. PSSE exhibited positive benefits on the Cobb angle, ATR, and TK in patients with AIS compared with other nonsurgical therapies. In addition, the effectiveness of PSSE may be independent of intervention duration and intervention type but may be influenced by the initial Cobb angle. However, more RCTs are needed in the future to validate the efficacy of PSSE in moderate AIS with a mean Cobb angle ≥30°. Current evidence is limited by inconsistent control group interventions and small sample size of the studies.