SEARCH_TOPIC: Exercise for seniors
TITLE: A seniors exercise park program for older adults with mild balance dysfunction - a feasibility study.
PMID: 36031870
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/36031870/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
To evaluate the feasibility of a multimodal exercise program conducted at a Seniors Exercise Park among older adults with mild balance dysfunction. Participants (aged ≥65 years) with mild balance dysfunction underwent 18 weeks of gradual reduction of supervised training followed by six weeks of independent training at the Seniors Exercise Park. Feasibility and safety were assessed at baseline, 18 and 24 weeks. Seventy-five participants expressed interest in the program. Of the 46 participants enrolled in the study, 36 (78.3%) completed the 18 week intervention, and 32 (69.6%) were followed-up at 24 weeks. The median adherence to supervised training was 90.9%, and independent practice was 26.3% (weeks 19-24). All the supervised training sessions were completed within 18 weeks. No falls, or adverse events occurred. All physical performance (e.g., balance, lower body strength, and mobility), psychosocial health outcomes (e.g., mental wellbeing) and quality of life improved significantly at 18 and 24 weeks. This initially supervised Seniors Exercise Park program which progressed to independent practice is feasible, safe, and improved health outcomes in older adults with mild balance dysfunction. Strategies are needed to improve adherence to independent practice and minimise dropouts. Implications for rehabilitationGradually reduced supervision in a Seniors Exercise Park program progressing to independent practice is feasible and safe for older adults with mild balance dysfunction.Seniors Exercise Parks can assist older adults with mild balance dysfunction to improve their balance, lower body strength, mobility, and psychosocial health.There is a need for more Seniors Exercise Parks in community parks to enable greater access to this novel exercise approach by older people, including those with mild balance dysfunction.