SEARCH_TOPIC: Female infertility
TITLE: Sleep disturbances and female infertility: a systematic review.
PMID: 39707272
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39707272/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Sleep disturbances are more prevalent among women with infertility. Current research increasingly highlights the significant relationship between sleep disturbances and female infertility, suggesting that sleep may be a key factor in reproductive health. In this review, we aim to delve into the complex interplay between sleep disturbances and female infertility, as well as to assess the underlying mechanisms involved, and seek to illuminate the causes of sleep-related fertility issues. The understanding of these contents may help clinicians enhance clinical strategies for managing sleep disturbances in women facing infertility challenges and provide timely support to those seeking fertility treatments. A comprehensive literature search was conducted in the PubMed and EMBASE databases. Studies that described sleep patterns or any type of sleep disturbance, sleep breathing disorders and their associations with female infertility or female fecundity, published between January 1, 2010, and November 1, 2023, were identified and extracted. The screening, data extraction, and quality assessment processes were independently performed by paired reviewers. The quality of the included studies was assessed using the Joanna Briggs Institute (JBI) Critical Appraisal tools for observational and cohort studies. A total of 1,179 articles were initially identified from the search strategy (PubMed, n = 377; EMBASE, n = 802). After removing duplicates (n = 83) and screening for eligibility (n = 75), 19 studies were reviewed and determined to be eligible for inclusion. Infertile women generally report poorer sleep quality and exhibit more evening sleep chronotypes. Sleep disorders are significantly associated with infertility. Poor sleep quality, extreme sleep durations, and certain sleep chronotypes are associated with poorer fertility treatment outcomes, such as a reduced number of retrieved oocytes, decreased embryo quality, and lower fertilization rates. Obstructive sleep apnea (OSA) is also more prevalent in women with fertility issues, especially those with polycystic ovary syndrome (PCOS), and may negatively impact reproductive outcomes. The circadian rhythms of the Clock gene system, melatonin and hormone dysregulation, oxidative stress and immune response are considered to be potential mechanisms explaining how sleep disturbance impairs reproductive function, remain to be fully elucidated, and therefore, require further investigation. Sleep disturbances are negatively associated with female infertility and poor fertility treatment outcomes. Longitudinal studies are expected to substantiate these findings and inform more nuanced approaches to prior sleep management and lifestyle advisement for infertile women, especially those undergoing fertility treatments. This study was registered in the International Prospective Register of Systematic Reviews (PROSPERO, #CRD42024498443).