SEARCH_TOPIC: Urinary system
TITLE: Urinary tract infection in pediatrics: an overview.
PMID: 31783012
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/31783012/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
This review aimed to provide a critical overview on the pathogenesis, clinical findings, diagnosis, imaging investigation, treatment, chemoprophylaxis, and complications of urinary tract infection in pediatric patients. Data were obtained independently by two authors, who carried out a comprehensive and non-systematic search in public databases. Urinary tract infection is the most common bacterial infection in children. Urinary tract infection in pediatric patients can be the early clinical manifestation of congenital anomalies of the kidney and urinary tract (CAKUT) or be related to bladder dysfunctions. E. coli is responsible for 80-90% of community-acquired acute pyelonephritis episodes, especially in children. Bacterial virulence factors and the innate host immune systems may contribute to the occurrence and severity of urinary tract infection. The clinical presentation of urinary tract infections in children is highly heterogeneous, with symptoms that can be quite obscure. Urine culture is still the gold standard for diagnosing urinary tract infection and methods of urine collection in individual centers should be determined based on the accuracy of voided specimens. The debate on the ideal imaging protocol is still ongoing and there is tendency of less use of prophylaxis. Alternative measures and management of risk factors for recurrent urinary tract infection should be emphasized. However, in selected patients, prophylaxis can protect from recurrent urinary tract infection and long-term consequences. According to population-based studies, hypertension and chronic kidney disease are rarely associated with urinary tract infection. Many aspects regarding urinary tract infection in children are still matters of debate, especially imaging investigation and indication of antibiotic prophylaxis. Further longitudinal studies are needed to establish tailored approach of urinary tract infection in childhood.