SEARCH_TOPIC: Palliative care
TITLE: Palliative care in lung transplantation.
PMID: 34118859
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/34118859/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The role of palliative care in lung transplantation has grown exponentially in the past two decades. From assisting with evaluating and optimizing candidates for transplant, to playing a crucial role in patients requiring extracorporeal cardiopulmonary life support (ECLS) as a bridge to lung transplant, perioperatively, or even during their first year post-transplant, palliative care has been shown to be an effective if underutilized tool in the armamentarium used to care for lung transplant patients. For patients being considered for primary transplantation and for lung transplant recipients, palliative care can decrease symptom burden and help to lessen the psychological distress experienced by patients and family members. For older patients listed for transplant, palliative care can help address cognitive impairment, depression, and frailty. Patients listed for lung re-transplant also benefit from palliative care involvement to address frequent symptom exacerbations, hospitalizations, and higher morbidity and mortality. Even for organ donors and their families, palliative care can facilitate communication and provide support to the family. While palliative care use in lung transplantation may be gradually increasing, further work is necessary to optimally integrate palliative care into lung transplantation. Barriers to lung transplant patients receiving palliative care are multifactorial and include physician, patient, and institutional factors. The potential role of palliative care in every aspect of lung transplantation has made a knowledge of palliative care principles crucial for the lung transplant practitioner. In this review, we will clearly delineate the potential benefit of palliative care for the perioperative lung transplant patient and make an argument for its increased use in this patient population.