SEARCH_TOPIC: ALS
TITLE: Cognitive and Behavioral Manifestations in ALS: Beyond Motor System Involvement.
PMID: 33808458
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/33808458/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Amyotrophic lateral sclerosis (ALS) has long been considered to be a purely motor disorder. However, it has become apparent that many ALS patients develop cognitive and behavioral manifestations similar to frontotemporal dementia and the term amyotrophic lateral sclerosis-frontotemporal spectrum disorder (ALS-FTSD) is now used in these circumstances. This review is intended to be an overview of the cognitive and behavioral manifestations commonly encountered in ALS patients with the goal of improving case-oriented management in clinical practice. We introduce the principal ALS-FTSD subtypes and comment on their principal clinical manifestations, neuroimaging findings, neuropathological and genetic background, and summarize available therapeutic options. Diagnostic criteria for ALS-FTSD create distinct categories based on the type of neuropsychological manifestations, i.e., changes in behavior, impaired social cognition, executive dysfunction, and language or memory impairment. Cognitive impairment is found in up to 65%, while frank dementia affects about 15% of ALS patients. ALS motor and cognitive manifestations can worsen in parallel, becoming more pronounced when bulbar functions (affecting speech, swallowing, and salivation) are involved. Dementia can precede or develop after the appearance of motor symptoms. ALS-FTSD patients have a worse prognosis and shorter survival rates than patients with ALS or frontotemporal dementia alone. Important negative prognostic factors are behavioral and personality changes. From the clinician's perspective, there are five major distinguishable ALS-FTSD subtypes: ALS with cognitive impairment, ALS with behavioral impairment, ALS with combined cognitive and behavioral impairment, fully developed frontotemporal dementia in combination with ALS, and comorbid ALS and Alzheimer's disease. Although the most consistent ALS and ALS-FTSD pathology is a disturbance in transactive response DNA binding protein 43 kDa (TDP-43) metabolism, alterations in microtubule-associated tau protein metabolism have also been observed in ALS-FTSD. Early detection and careful monitoring of cognitive deficits in ALS are crucial for patient and caregiver support and enable personalized management of individual patient needs.