SEARCH_TOPIC: Multivitamins
TITLE: Multivitamin consumption and childhood asthma: a cross-sectional study of the NHANES database.
PMID: 38297283
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/38297283/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Dietary intakes of vitamins are associated with asthma. However, previous studies mainly explored the association between a single vitamin intake and asthma, which did not take the multivitamins into consideration. Herein, this study aims to explore the overall effect of dietary multivitamins consumption on childhood asthma. Data of children and adolescents (aged 2-17 years old) were extracted from the National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey (NHANES) database in 2015-2018 in this cross-sectional study. Weighted univariate logistic regression analysis was used to screen covariates. The association between multivitamins (including vitamin A, C, D, E, B1, B2, B6, B12, K, niacin, folic acid, and choline) and childhood asthma was explored using univariate and multivariate logistic regression analyses. The evaluation indexes were odds ratio (OR) and 95% confidence interval (CI). We further introduced the Bayesian kernel machine regression (BKMR) to assess the joint effect of the twelve vitamins on childhood asthma, the impact of an individual vitamin as part of a vitamin mixture, and the potential interactions among different vitamins. Among 4,715 eligible children and adolescents, 487 (10.3%) had asthma. After adjusting for covariates including race, family history of asthma, pregnant smoking, BMI Z-score, energy intake, breast feeding, and low birth weight, we found that for each 1-unit increase in vitamin K consumption, the odds of childhood asthma decreased 0.99 (P=0.028). The overall effect analysis reported a trend of negative relationship between the multivitamins and childhood asthma, especially at the 75th percentile and over. According to the BKMR models, when other vitamins are fixed at the median level, the odds of childhood asthma increased along with the elevated vitamin D (VD) and vitamin B2 (VB2), whereas along with the depressed vitamin C (VC). In addition, no potential interaction has been found between every two vitamins of multivitamins on childhood asthma. Among children and adolescents who have high-risk of asthma, it may be beneficial to increase dietary consumption of multivitamins. Our findings recommended that children and adolescents should increase the intake of VC-rich foods, whereas control the dietary consumption of VD and VB2 in daily life.