SEARCH_TOPIC: Probiotics and gut health
TITLE: What defines a healthy gut microbiome?
PMID: 39322314
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/39322314/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
The understanding that changes in microbiome composition can influence chronic human diseases and the efficiency of therapies has driven efforts to develop microbiota-centred therapies such as first and next generation probiotics, prebiotics and postbiotics, microbiota editing and faecal microbiota transplantation. Central to microbiome research is understanding how disease impacts microbiome composition and vice versa, yet there is a problematic issue with the term 'dysbiosis', which broadly links microbial imbalances to various chronic illnesses without precision or definition. Another significant issue in microbiome discussions is defining 'healthy individuals' to ascertain what characterises a healthy microbiome. This involves questioning who represents the healthiest segment of our population-whether it is those free from illnesses, athletes at peak performance, individuals living healthily through regular exercise and good nutrition or even elderly adults or centenarians who have been tested by time and achieved remarkable healthy longevity.This review advocates for delineating 'what defines a healthy microbiome?' by considering a broader range of factors related to human health and environmental influences on the microbiota. A healthy microbiome is undoubtedly linked to gut health. Nevertheless, it is very difficult to pinpoint a universally accepted definition of 'gut health' due to the complexities of measuring gut functionality besides the microbiota composition. We must take into account individual variabilities, the influence of diet, lifestyle, host and environmental factors. Moreover, the challenge in distinguishing causation from correlation between gut microbiome and overall health is presented.The review also highlights the resource-heavy nature of comprehensive gut health assessments, which hinders their practicality and broad application. Finally, we call for continued research and a nuanced approach to better understand the intricate and evolving concept of gut health, emphasising the need for more precise and inclusive definitions and methodologies in studying the microbiome.