SEARCH_TOPIC: IUD
TITLE: Conventional manual technique of post placental IUD insertion versus intra-cesarean post placental introducer withdrawal IUD insertion technique: a new standardized technique for IUD insertion during cesarean section: a randomized controlled trial.
PMID: 37365489
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37365489/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Inserting IUDs during cesarean section reduces the need for more manipulation and discomfort. The current conventional manual technique for IUD insertion during cesarean section is not standardized with many modifications and high rates of expulsion, displacement, missed threads, and discontinuation. This study aims to find a standard technique for IUD insertion during cesarean section with the least possible problems, especially displacement and missed threads. A randomized controlled study was conducted at Kasr Al-Ainy Maternity Hospital, Cairo University, Egypt. The study was performed over 12 months, from September 2020 to September 2021. Two groups of patients were selected; each group included 420 patients with a desire for IUD insertion during cesarean section. Group (A) (Control group) was subjected to a post-placental intrauterine device (Copper T380) during cesarean section using a conventional manual method; Group (B) (Study group): the IUD (Copper T380) was placed at the top of the uterine fundus using a new technique (intra-cesarean post placental introducer withdrawal IUD insertion technique). There was a significant statistical difference between the two groups regarding displacement of the IUDs at the end of puerperium, at 6 months, non-visibility of IUD threads, and continuation of use with p-value < 0.05. There was no significant statistical difference in the term of duration of surgery. The new technique of post-placental IUD insertion can be the standard technique of intra-cesarean section IUD insertion as it is associated with more favorable outcomes among the included women in the form of lower incidence of IUD displacement, non-visibility of IUD threads, and higher rates of continuation without increasing the duration of surgery as compared with the conventional manual technique. ClinicalTrial.gov ID: NCT05788354, registration date: 28/03/2023 (retrospectively registered).