SEARCH_TOPIC: Male infertility
TITLE: Role of oxidative stress in male infertility.
PMID: 37276172
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/37276172/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Infertility affects millions of couples worldwide. Oxidative stress (OS) causes peroxidation of lipids and damage to spermatozoa, thus, reducing the quality of seminal parameters. In addition, the differences in the levels of antioxidants and reactive oxygen species (ROS) caused by intrinsic and extrinsic variables linked to lifestyle, diet, genetics, and OS also contribute to male infertility. High levels of ROS result in sperm damage of sperm parameters due to lipid peroxidation and oxidation of proteins. Other significant causes of ROS include changes in sex hormone levels, sperm DNA damage, including mutations, and immature spermatozoa. Treating the root causes of OS, by changing one's lifestyle, as well as antioxidant therapy, may be helpful strategies to fight OS-related infertility. However, the determination of male infertility induced by OS is currently a challenge in the field of reproductive health research. This review intends to describe the role of oxidative stress on male infertility and the current understanding of its management. The inability to conceive affects many couples globally. Oxidative stress refers to imbalances between different oxygen species which can lead to male fertility problems by damaging sperm and semen. Oxidative stress may be caused by several factors, including diets high in fats, sugars and processed foods, lifestyle (including smoking, alcohol consumption and having a sedentary lifestyle), and genetics. Treatment that focuses on the root cause may help combat male infertility. However, there is currently no consensus on the best way to treat male fertility problems, particularly those associated with oxidative stress. This paper describes the role of oxidative stress on male infertility and discusses the current techniques employed in treating male fertility issues.