SEARCH_TOPIC: Blood transfusion
TITLE: Collection and administration of blood products in horses: Transfusion indications, materials, methods, complications, donor selection, and blood testing.
PMID: 35044065
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/35044065/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
Blood transfusion is a lifesaving treatment for horses with acute hemorrhage and other causes of anemia. Transfusions improve oxygen delivery to the tissues via increased blood volume and hemoglobin concentration. Certain aspects of equine blood transfusion are challenging, especially in the field situation, and practitioners may be unfamiliar or feel overwhelmed with the process. An understanding of the indications, materials, methods, and techniques as well as donor selection and possible complications will help practitioners successfully implement blood transfusion in clinical practice. Blood transfusion involves several steps including appropriate donor selection, cross-matching, blood collection, and administration, as well as monitoring and handling of transfusion reactions. Guidance for each of these steps are detailed in this review. Blood transfusion is an effective and often lifesaving treatment for managing diseases of blood loss, hemolysis, and decreased RBC production. Equine practitioners require a thorough understanding of the indications for blood transfusion, the immunological principles behind compatibility testing and transfusion reactions, and the technical skills to aseptically collect and administer blood products KEY POINTS: Equine practitioners require a thorough understanding of the indications for blood transfusion, the immunological principles behind compatibility testing and transfusion reactions, and the technical skills to aseptically collect and administer blood products. Because there are over 400,000 possible equine RBC phenotypes, no universal donor exists, and some blood type incompatibilities are likely between any donor and recipient. Therefore, prior to any blood transfusion, donor and recipient blood should be cross-matched Inadequate delivery of oxygen (Do<sub>2</sub> ) to the tissues, resulting from low hemoglobin (Hb) concentration, is the most important indication for blood transfusion Neonatal isoerythrolysis most commonly occurs following an anamnestic response in late gestation; it rarely occurs following a primary exposure because the immune response is not strong enough to produce clinically significant alloantibody titers.