SEARCH_TOPIC: Hashimotos thyroiditis
TITLE: Thyroiditis.
PMID: 2939821
SOURCE_URL: https://pubmed.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/2939821/
TYPE: PubMed Medical Abstract

ABSTRACT:
In this review, the major types of immune mediated thyroiditis are described and the etiology explained in the light of current theories of autoimmunity. Hashimoto's thyroiditis is a common autoimmune disease. The onset is gradual with patients presenting with symptoms of hypothyroidism, nonspecific symptoms of the autoimmune process itself, or symptoms relating to a goitre. The disease is usually relentless and, except in young patients, permanent replacement with thyroxine is eventually required. Silent thyroiditis is another autoimmune disease of more acute onset. The initial, thyrotoxic, phase lasting several weeks is due to release of thyroid hormone from damaged follicles, and radionuclidic scans show absent uptake. There often follows a hypothyroid phase with final recovery in most patients. Post partum thyroiditis is due to silent thyroiditis, or, less commonly, Hashimoto's thyroiditis, occurring three to six months after delivery. Subacute thyroiditis often follows a viral infection and is not thought to be an autoimmune disease. It presents with severe thyroid pain and tenderness with marked non-specific symptoms such as myalgia and fatigue. The initial, thyrotoxic, phase is also due to release of thyroid hormone, and radionuclidic scans show absent uptake. A hypothyroid phase often follows and recovery is complete. Hashimoto's thyroiditis appears to be due to a congenitally present, antigen specific, T suppressor lymphocyte defect. It is proposed that in silent thyroiditis there is a less severe Ts defect and a correspondingly greater decompensating factor. In post partum thyroiditis, this factor appears to be a general decline in T suppressor lymphocyte function after delivery. Subacute thyroiditis is not an autoimmune disease. The thyroid appears to be an "innocent bystander" in an immune mediated antiviral attack.