Title: Nanomechanical Characterization of E-Cigarette-Induced Lung Endothelial Dysfunction: Roles of Cortactin and Mitochondrial Reactive Oxygen Species.

Abstract: E-cigarettes (E-cigs) are increasing in popularity and are considered a potentially safer alternative to traditional cigarettes. However, prior studies have demonstrated that inhalation of nicotine-containing e-cigs can cause substantial pathophysiologic changes, and "vaping" of some substances has led to severe lung damage. Our group recently described the role of cortactin (<i>CTTN</i>), a cytoskeletal actin-binding regulatory protein, in mediating cigarette smoke (CS) and E-cig-induced lung endothelial apoptosis and mitochondrial dysfunction. In the current study, we advance this work by characterizing the effects of E-cig on lung endothelial nanomechanical properties and barrier function. Lung EC exposure to E-cig extract (50 µg/mL) resulted in disruption of endothelial barrier properties as assessed by Electric Cell-Substrate Impedance Sensing (ECIS). Since excess mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (mitoROS) is an important marker of mitochondrial dysfunction, we next assessed the effect of Mito-TEMPO (10 µM, 3 h), a cell-permeable antioxidant, on E-cig-induced endothelial permeability. Pretreatment with Mito-TEMPO provided EC barrier protection after E-cig challenge, suggesting a key role of mitoROS in E-cig-induced EC permeability. E-cig exposure induces cytoskeleton rearrangement, leading to gap formation in lung EC, and significantly alters EC elastic properties as assessed by atomic force microscopy (AFM). Reduction in <i>CTTN</i> expression by siRNA further augmented the injurious effects of E-cig on EC permeability and elastic properties. This is the first study to explore the role of CTTN in evaluating the effect of E-cigarette exposure on the lung endothelium using AFM and provides novel mitochondrial and biophysical characterization of the effects of E-cig exposure on human lung EC. This work advances our understanding of the pathophysiologic effects of E-cig exposure.